http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 12
PETITIONER:
STATE OF GUJARAT AND ANR.
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
HON’BLE HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 24/09/1998
BENCH:
D.P. WADHWA, K.T.THOMAS,
ACT:
HEADNOTE:
JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
While concluding his opinion my learned brother K.T.
Thomas, J. has made certain directions to the respective
governments to which conclusion my learned bother D.P.
Wadhwa, J. in his separate opinion has accorded assent. I
too would accord approval to those directions and order
disposal of these appeals and writ petitions.
Thomas J.
A delicate issue requiring very circumspective
approach is mooted before us: Whether prisoners, who are
required to do labour as part of their punishment should
necessarily be paid wages for such work at the rates
prescribed under Minimum Wages law. We have before us
appeals filed by some State Governments challenging the
judgments rendered by the respective High Courts which in
principle upheld the contention that denial of wages at such
rates would fringe on infringement of the constitutional
protection against execution of forced labour.
Shri Rajeev Dhawan, senior counsel put before us the
view points of National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) which
feverous the principle that prisoners should be paid wages
at the rates prescribed under the Minimum Wages law. On the
request of this Court Shri Kapil Sibal, senior counsel
addressed arrguments as Amicus Curiae.During the course of
hearing we felt the need to hear the Attorney General for
India on this important question. Shri Soli J. Sorabji,
Attorney General, in response to our request addressed
arguments substantially in tune with the approach made by
the other two senior counsel. We are grateful to all the
learned counsel who assisted us with their valuable
contributions.
The State Governments which preferred the appeals
are generally in agreement with the view that prisoners
should be paid wages and that the present rates of wages
paid to them are too meargre and hence they must be
onhanced. To what extent is the plank on which the State
Government contested these causes by challenging the
judgements under appeals.
A Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala
(Subramonian Poti CJ and Chandrasekhara Menon, J) in thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 12
decision entitled as "in the matter of prison reform
enchancement of wages of prisoners" (1983 KLT 512), seems to
have taken the land in this area and suggested that the
wages ggiven to prisoners must be as per with the wages
fixed under the Minimum Wages Act (for short MW Act) and the
request to deduct the cost for providing food and clothes to
the prisoner from such wages was spurned down. The Division
Bench directed the State Government to desigtn a just and
reasonable wage structure for the inmates of the prisons who
are employed to do lablor, and in the meanwhile to pay the
prisoners at the rate of Rs. 8 per day until Government is
able to decide the appropriate wages to be paid to such
prisoners. Learned counsel for the State submitted before
us that the challenge is limited to the question whether
deduction of cost of food and clothes is permissible.
Gujarat High Court adopted the same stand as the
Division Bench of Kerala had taken in the decision cited
supra (1983 KLT 512). The judgment was rendered by a
Division Bench headed by P Subramaniam Poti, CJ and the
reasons adverted in the decision of the kerala High Court
were reiterated.
A Singh Judge of Rajasthan High Court suggested that
the State Government shall appoint a Commission to go into
the entire wage Structure for the convicted prisoners, and
tto lay down rules, and in the meanwhile directed the State
to pay to the prisoners at the rates tentatively fixed by
tthe learned Judge. A Division Bench confirmed the said
judgement which is now challenged by the State of Rajasthan.
A Division Bench of the High Court of Himachal
Pradesh (Bhawani Singh and Devendra Gupta, JJ) vide Gurdev
Singh Vs. State (AIR 1976 HP 76) directed the State
Government to undertake comprehensive jail reforms and
appoint a high powered committee within a year to look into
the various aspects including payment of reasonable minimum
wages to the prisoners. At the same time the Division Bench
directed that "the provisions permitting realisation of
maintenance charges from the prisoners bne dispensod with
forthwith and no future recovery be made in this behalf."
State of Himachal Pradesh has now challenged the said
judgment before us.
All the above appeals and two writ petitions filed
by some prisoners (or on their behalf), for directing the
State Government concerned to enchance the wages payable to
the prisoners have been heard by us in .....
Indian prisons are now crammed with prisoners. In
many jails theyt are so over-crowded that the amentities
designed for a far less number of inmates are now being
shared by disproportionately large number of internees
therein, e.g. In Bihar jails, as against a prison capacity
of 26,300 the actual number of internees during first half
of 1996 was 36,700. In Madhya Pradesh the figure is 27,300
as against a prison capacity of 17,720. Even in Delhi it
has crossed 8,300 as against a prison capacity of 2,400.
There are principally two categories: (1)
under-trial prisoners and (2) convicted prisoners (Besides
them there are those detained as preventive measure, and
those undergoing detention for default of payment of fine).
Those in the first category cannot be required to do any
labour while they remain in jail, but they far outnumber all
the remaining categories put together. Statistics show that
in most of the States the under-trial prisoners have
overwhelming majority when compared with the number of
convicted prisoners, e.g. Under-trial prisoners in Bihar
jails are 84.04% of the total inmates of the jails. In U.P.
the percentage is 85.17. In Madhya Pradesh it is 64.22% andhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 12
in most other States the percentage of under-trial prisoners
is above 50.
Jail authorities are enjoined by law to impose hard
labour on a particular section of the convicted prisoners
who were sentenced to rigorous imprisonment. Section 53 of
the Indian Penal Code which falls under the Chapter entitled
"Of Punishments" vivisects punishments into five categories,
of which the category "imprisonment" has been further sub
divided into two sub categories as "rigorous" and "simple".
Rigorous imprisonment is explained as "imprisonment with
hard labour". Section 60 of the Indian Penal Code confers
power on a sentencing court of direct that "such
imprisonment shall be wholly rigorous or that such
imprisonment shall be wholly simple, or that any part of
such imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest simple".
or that any part of such imprisonment shall be rigorous and
the rest simple". The sentence of "imprisonment for life"
tagged along with a number of offences delineated in the
Indian Penal Code is interpreted as "rigorous imprisonment
for life" and not simple imprisonment. (Vide the decisions
of COnstitution Bench in G.V. Godse Vs. State - AIR 1961
SC 600, and Naib Singh Vs. State of Punjab - AIR 1983 SC
855).
A person sentenced to simple imprisonment cannot be
required to work unless he volunteers himself to do the
work. Section 374 of the IPC makes imposition of work on an
unwilling person as an offence. The section reads thus:
Whoever unlawfully compels any person to labour
labour against the will of that person shall be
punished with imprisonment of either descriptions,
for a term which may extend to one year or with fine
or with both."
But the jail officer who requires a prisoner
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment to do hard labour would
be doing so as enjoined by law and mandated by the court.
No. prisoner sentenced to rigorour imprisonment can
conceivably complain that the jail authorities committed the
offence under Section 374 of IPC by compelling him to do
work during the term of his imprisonment. So the task to do
labour can be imposed on a prisoner only if he has been
sentionced to rigorous imprisonment Neither the under-trial
internees nor the detainees with simple imprisonment non
even detenus who are kept in jails as preventive measres can
be asked to do manual work during their prison term. It is a
diferent matter that he is allowed to do it at his request.
Two profiles emerge from the above discussion. First
is a vast majority of prisoners are not concerned about the
wages for the labour in jails. It is only for a small
section of the detainees that this exercise would benefit.
Second is that hard labour is enforced on those sentenced to
rigorous imprisonment by the sanction of law and jail
authorities cannot disobey the directions of the court which
passed the sentence.
The first contention before us was that when hard
labour is made a part of punishment as lawfully imposed, can
it be equated with the normal employer - employee phenomenon
so as to entitle the prisoner to the social and legislative
benefits which a free employee gets outside the walls of the
prison. The picture endeavoured to be portrayed before us,
in support of the contention, is that in a country like ours
where unemployment among youth is so rampant and acute, a
life assuring reasonably good living and a minimum income at
the rates fixed for employees of industrial and commercial
establishments would provide great incentive to the
unemployed youth to resort to crimes for carving out a routehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 12
to the jails, albeit under conditions of incarceration. This
would gallop the crime rates upward as many among the
unemployed may feel tempted to avail themselves of such
advantages despite the disadvantages, apprehends the
aforesaid school of thought.
But that argument will not and should not deter us
from considering minimum wages for the average individual
would abhor incarceration in jails, whatever comfort and
monetary benefit it may provide to them. The reality is that
even those inside the jails, by and large, are looking
forward to the day of their release so as to get their
personal freedom restored so that they can move about freely
in societty, live with their beloveds and to enjoy the free
atmosphere of life. Most of them are in certitude of the
precise number of months, weeks and days they had already
spent in jails as well as the number of days they secured by
way of remissions and also the remaining period they have to
continue in jails before attaining the cherished exit from
the iron gates of the bastions.
Learned Chief Justic P. Subramanion Poti, speaking
for the Division Bench of the Kerala High Court, in the
decision cited above (1983 Kerala Law Times 512) has
frescoed a picture of reality that "many accelerate their
release by purchasing remission parting with the few paise
that they earn by way of wages and by donating blood in the
hope that this process takes them nearer to the day when
they can be back in the affectionate atmosphere at home.
The most deterrent factor in imprisonment is really the fact
of curtailment of personal freedom. It may not be necessary
to make it harsh and inhuman in order to render the sentence
of imprisonment a deterrent."
Article 23 of the Constitution prohibits "forced
Labour" and mandated that any contravention of such
prohibition shall be an offence punishable in accordance
with law. That Article reads thus:
"23. Prohibition of traffic in human beings and
forced labour-
(1) Traffic in human beings and begar and other
similar forms of forced labour are prohibited any
any contravention of this provision shall be an
offence punishable in accordance with law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the
State from imposing compulsory service for public
purposes, and in imposing such service the State
shall not make any discrimination of grounds only of
religion. race. caste or class or any of them."
Articles 23 and 24 are the only two
provisions subsumed under the heading "Right against
exploitation." The latter provision prohibits children being
employed in factory or mine or other hazardous employments.
In the former three unsocial practices are prohibited: (1)
Traffic in human beings, (2) Begar and (3) similar forms of
forced labour. Traffic in human beinghs is absolute while
prohibition aghainst "forced labour" is made subject to one
exception, i.e., State is permitted to impose compulsory
service if such service is necessary for public purpose.
Otherwise the ban against forced labour is also absolute.
The expression "forced labour" seems to be collocted with
the word "begar". the work "begar" was of Indian origin and
has, in due course of time gained entry into the English
vocabulary. That word is understood to be the labour or
service which a person is forced to give without reeceiving
any remuneration for it. It was so held by a Division Bench
of the Bombay High Court in Vasudevan vs. Mittal (AIR 1962
Bombay 53) and that was approved by this Court in People’shttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 12
Union for Democratic Rights vs. Union of India [1982 (3) SCC
235].
When the Constitution qualified "forced labour" by
associating it with other works "begar and other similar
forms" it was not for shrinking the scope of the prohibition
to some types of forced labour. Learned Judges in People’s
Union for Democratic Rights have observed that forced labour
may arise in several ways, it may be physical fore, it may
be force exerted through a legal provision such as the
provision for imprisonment or fine in case the employee
fails to provide labour or service or it may even be
compulsion arising from hunger and poverty, want and
destitution. Any factor which deprives a person of a choice
of alternatives and compels him to adept one particular
course of action may properly be regarded as force. The
Bench observed thus:
"We are, therefore, of the view that where a
person provided labour or service to another or
remuneration which is less than minimum wage, the
labour or service provided by him clearly falls
within the scope and ambit of the words "forced
labour" under Article 23."
We are in respectful agreement with the aforesaid
view.
Would the Constitution-makers have thought that
imposition of hard labour on the convicted prisoners is not
included within the concept of "forced labour" envisaged in
Article 23. In many other Republican COnstitutions
protection aginst forced labour is subjected to the
exception that hard labour imposed on convicted persons
would not be "forced labour."
In the Constitution of United State of America
Section 1 of the Thirteenth amendment 1865 contains the
following provision:
"(i) Nither slavery nor involuntary
servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof
the party shall have been duly convicted, shall
exist within the United State, or any place subject
to their jurisdiction."
Same exception is seen incorporated in the analogous
provision of the Constitution of a large number of other
Republics. For example, Burma, Japan, Cyprus, republic of
Korea, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan etc. to cite one example,
Article 19 of the Constitution of Burma, 1948 reads thus:
i. Traffic in human beings, and
ii. Forced labour in any form and involuntary
servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof
the party shall have been duly convicted, shall be
prohibited.
Explanation:- Nothing in this section shall
prevent the State from imposing compulsory service
for public purpose without any discrimination on
grounds of birth, race, religion or class.
(emphasis supplied)
In this connection it is worthy of notice that
during the making of our Constitution the same execption was
thought of in the original draft. Clause 11 of the Chapter
for Fundamental Rights as adopted by the Advisory Committee
read like this:
"11. (a) Traffic in human beings, and
(b) forced labour in any form including begar and
involuntary servitude except as a punishment for
crime whereof the party shall have been duly
convicted,
are hereby prohibited and any contravention of thishttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 6 of 12
prohibition shall be an offence."
After a full debate the Constituent Assembly adopted
clause 11 by chiselling it down to the form in which Article
23 of the COnstitution is now shaped. (vide page 252 to 257
of "The Framing of India’s COnstitution" - A Study by B.N.
Ambedkar in his summing up remarks asid in the Constituent
Assembly that the exception envisaged in sub-clause (2)
regarding "public purposes" is very wide enough to contain
all such exceptional conditions. Thus it is apparently clear
that imposition of forced labour on a prisoner will get
protection from the ban under Article 23 of the COnstitution
only if it can be justified as a necessity to achieve some
public purpose.
So the question now to be considered is, whether such
compulsory labour can be justified by testing it on the
touchstone of "public purpose". What public purpose possibly
be served by exacting such labourr work from convicted
prisoners? It is said that hard labour imposed on the proved
offenders would have a deterrent effect against others from
committing crimes and thus society would, to that extent, be
protected from perpetration of criminal offences by others.
This is the context to consider whether deterrence is
the main objective for punishment. Among the conflicting the
ories for punishment modern criminologists are highlighting
the reformative effect on the punished criminal as the most
germane aspect. Jereme Bentham who propounded the theory of
deterrence is now considered as apostle of a conservative old
school of thought. Retributive theory of punishment has
waned into a relic of the primitivity because civilised
society has realised that retribution cannot solve the
problem of escalating criminal offences. Crime is now
considered to be a problem of social hygiene. That modern
diagnosis made by criminologists is now causing a sea change
to the whole approach towards crime and punishment. The
emphasis involved in punishment has now been transposed from
retribution to cure and reform so that the original man, who
was mentally healthy, can be recreated from the ailing
criminal.
To Mother Teresa "the prisoner is Jesus to me". The
world renowned philanthropist, as she was, would have been
very much inspired by the scriptural words pronounced by Lord
Jesus as quoted in the gospel according to Mathew (chapter 25
verse 36):
"Then the King will say to those on his right hand -
’Come ye, who are blessed by my Father in Heaven,
for, I was ......... in prison and you came to see me
you cursed ones, for, I was ........ in prison and
you did not visit me".
It is a grand transformation recorded in the epics
that the hunter Valmiki turned out to be a poet of enternal
recognition. If the powers which brought about that
transformation had remained inactive the world wwould have
been poorer without the great epic "Ramayana." History is
replete with instances of bad persons transforming into men
of great usefulnedd to humanity. The causes which would have
influenced such swing may be of various kinds. forces which
condemn a prisoner and consign him to the cell as a case of
irredeemable character belong to the pessimistic society
which lacks the vision to see the innate good in man.
Theory of reformation through punishment is grounded
on the sublime philosophy that every man is born good but
circumstances transform him into a criminal. The aphorism
that "If every saint has a past every sinner has a future" is
a tested philosophy concerning human life. V.R. Krishna Iyer.
J. has taken pains to ornately fresco the reforrmativehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 7 of 12
profile of the principles of senteencing in Mohammad
Giasuddin vs. State of Andhra Pradesh [1977 (3) SCC 287]. The
following passage deserves special mention in this context:
"If the psychic perspective and the spiritual insight
we have tried to project is valid, the police bully
and the prison drill cannot ’minister to a mind
diseased’, nor tone down the tension, release the
repression, unbend the prevention, each of which
shows up as debased deviance, violent vice and
behavioural turpitude. It is a truism, often
forgotten in the hidden vendotta in human bosoms,
that barbarity breeds barbarity, and injury recoils
as injury, so that if healing the mentally or morally
maimed or malformed man (found quilty) is the goal,
awakening the inner being, more than torturing
through exterior compulsions, holds out better
curative hopes."
Reformation should hence be the dominant objective of
a punishment and during incarceration every effort should be
made to recreate the good man out of a convicted prisoner. An
assurance to him that his hard labour would eventually
snowball into a handsome saving forr his own rehabilitation
would help him to get stripped of the moroseness and
desperation in his mind while toiling with the rigours of
hard labour during the period of his jail life. Thus,
reformation and rehabilitation of a prisoner are of great
public policy. Hence they serve a public purpose.
Reformative approach is now very much intertwined
with rehabilitative aspect to a convicted prisoner. It is
hence reasonable conclusion from the above discussion that a
directive from the court under the authority of law to
subject a convicted person (who was sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment) to compulsory manual labour gets legal
protection under the exemption provided in Clause (2) of
Article 23 of the Constitution because it serves a public
purpose.
All the learned counsel who argued before us are in
unision in agreeing to the proposition that no prisoner can
be asked to do labour free of wages. It is not only the
legal right of a workman to have wages for the work, it is a
social imperative and an ethical compulsion. Extracting
somebody’s work without giving him anything in return is only
reminiscent of the period of slavery and the system of begar.
It is only appropriate in this context to remind
ourselves of what Chandrachud J. (as the learned Chief
Justice then was) has observed in Bhuvan Mohan Patnaik Vs.
State of Andhra Pradesh [1975 (3) SCC 185] :
"Convicts are not, by mere reason of the conviction,
denduded of all the fundamental rights which they
otherwwise possess. A compulsion under the authority
of law, following upon a conviction, to live in a
prisonhouse entails by its own force the deprivation
of fundamental freedoms like the right to move
freely throughout the territory of India or the
right to "practise" a profession. A man of
profession would thus stand stripped of his right to
hold consultations while serving out his sentence.
But the Constitution guarantees other freedoms like
the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property
forr the exercise of which incarceration can be no
impediment, likewise, even a convict is entitled to
the precious right guaranteed by Article 21 of the
Constitution that he shall not be deprived of his
life or personal liberty except according to
procedure established by law."http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 8 of 12
Having thus found that like any other workman a
prisoner is also entitled to wages for his work the question
next to be considered is - what is the rate at which the
prisoner should be paid for their work? We have no doubt
that payingg a pittance to them is virtually paying nothing.
Even if the amount paid to them is a little mere than a
nominal sum the resultant position would remain the same.
Government of India had set up in 1980 a committee on jail
reforms under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice AN Mulla, a
retired judge of the Allahabad High Court. The report
submitted by the said Committee is known as ’Mulla Committee
Report." It contains a lot of very valuable suggestions,
among which the following are contextually apposite.
"All prisoners under sentence should be required to
work subject to their physcial and mental fitness as
determined medically. Work is not to be conceived as
additional punishment but as a means of furthering
the rehabilitation of the prisoners, their training
for worrk, the forming of better work habits, and of
preventing idleness and disorder............
Punitive, repressive and afflictivee work in any form
should not be given to prisoners. Work should not
become a drudgery and a meaningless prison activity.
Work and trainig programmes should be treated as
importantt avenues of imparting useful values to
inmates for their vocational and social adjustment
and also for their ultimate rehabilitation in the
free community..............
Rates of Wages should be fair and equitable and not
merely nominal or paltry. These rates should be
standardised so as to achieve a broad uniformity in
wage system in all the prisons in cash State and
Union Territory."
While considering the quantum of wages payable to the
prisonerrs we are persuaded to take into account the
contemporary legislative exercises on wages. Minimum wages
law has now come to stay. This COurt has held that minimum
wage which is sufficient to meet the bare physical needs of a
workman and his family irrespective of the paying capacity of
the industry must be somethings more than subsistence wage
which may be sufficient to cover the bare physical needs of
the worker and its family including education, medical needs,
amenities adequate for preservation is his efficiency.
(Express Newspapers Ltd.,Vs. Union of India, 1959 SCR 12).
Serval guidelines have been provided by the
legislature for fixing the rates of minimum wages and the
need to make periodical revisions. Section 3 of the MW Act
enjoins a statutory duty on the approprite government to fix
minimum rates of wages payable to employees employed in an
employment and to review the rates of wages so fixed at such
intervals as the government may think fit but not exceeding
five years. Section 5 of the MW Act provides that in fixing
minimum rates of wages in respect of the scheduled employment
for the first time or in revising such rates the government
shall appoint committees to hold enquiries and advise the
government in respect of such fixation.
Alternatively, the government is obliged to publish its
proposals. Fixation or revision of minimum wages can be made
only in consideration of the advice of the committee and the
representations received about it.
The State of kerala in the appeal has expressed
objection to pay the prisoners at the rates fixed as per MW
law. But during arguments learned counsel for the State
submitted that Government is willing to pay the prisoners
wages at the said rates after deducting a certain percentagehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 9 of 12
therefrom which represents the amount needed for the food and
clothes supplied to the prisoners. Such a plea for deduction
was rejected by the High COurts, mainly on the premise that
the obligation to provide food and clothes to the prisoners
is the inherent obligation of the State on account of the
very fact of their internment in prisons. The Division Bench
of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh spurned down the
aforesaid plea made on behalf of the State. Learned Judgges
have quoted from the Full Bench decision of the Gujarat High
Court in Jail Reforms Committee Vs. State of Gujarat as
follows:
"Under-trials are in custody in Jails and sub-jails.
They are not to do any work nevertheless they have to
be fed and clothed. There are detenus under the law
of preventive detention who are also provided with
food and clothing in jails without any return by way
of work. There are prisoners sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment wwho are sick and are unable to do work
and they have necessarily to be fed. They cannot be
told that since they do not work they will not be
fed. Even those who are able to work and who could
be compelled to do labour may not be given labour due
to absence of work as the reply affidavit of the
State Government shows. It mentions that at times
the sales of produce manufactured in jails are poor
and then many go without work. It cannot be said that
they will not be fed when there is no work. These
work illustrate beyond doubt that feeding of a
prisoner is a responsibility of those who keep the
prisoner in custody irrespective of any return from
him. It is so not only human beings, but even
animals. When they are not allowed to be free they
have to be fed. It will be uncivilised, if not cruel,
to extract from such prisoners the return for the
food and clothing supplied to them not food and
clothing of their choice, not food and clothing of
excellence, but only a bare subsistence which any
authority that keeps another in custody and retain
must necessarily meet as a compulsory obligation. If
the prisoners’ wages is appropriated for the food
naturally the prisoner must have a choice of saying
no and making his own choice of the food. That cannot
be the case.
It is true that State Government has the obligattion
to bear the expenses needed for providing food and clothes
and other amenities to every prisoner, whether his detention
is during post conviction period or pre-conviction period as
under-trial prisoner or has been preventively detained or is
interned as a consequence of defaulting payment of fine
imposed as punishment. If that is the only angle through
which this question has to be looked at there is, perhaps, a
point to castigate deduction of the amount spent on food and
clothes of a prisoner from the minimum wages rate. But the
issue has to be looked at from three other angles also.
First is this, if wages at the rates fixed under MW
Act are paid to a prisoner without making any such deduction
its not effect would be that he gets wages apparently more
than the emoluments of a workman who does the same type of
work outside the jail. This is because the latter has to meet
his expenses for food and clothes from the minimum wages paid
to him.
Second angle is, the Government which has to pay
wages to the prisoner has the additional liability to supply
clothes and food to him because government has the duty,
willy nilly, to keep a convicted person in prison during suchhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 10 of 12
term as the Court sentences him to imprisonment. It is
taxpayer’s money which Government is expending for keeping
the prisoners inside the jail by providing him food and
clothes and other amenities. It is not because Government is
happy to do it or is looking forward to do it. It is a legal
compulsion on the Government. But its incidence is on the
common man’s coffer.
The third angle, and it is very important for this
purpose, is that even MW Act permits the employer to make
deductions of certain kinds from the wages of an employed
person. Section 12 of the Act permits him to make such
deductions as may be authorised and subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed by rules. Minimum Wages
(Central) rules contain the items of such deductions which
are permissible. Among such items the following two are
pertinent: (1) deductions for house accommodation supplied by
the employer (2) deductions for such amenities and services
supplied by the employer as the government may authorise.
Thus deduction of cost of clothes and food supplied to an
employee from his wages is not inconsistent with legislative
policy.
When all aspects are considered we are inclined to
think that the request of the Government to permit them to
deduct the expenses incurred for food and clothes of the
prisoners from the minimum wages rates is a reasonable
request. There is nothing uncivilised nor unsociable
percentage to be deducted from Minimum Wages taking into
account the average amount which thee government is spending
per prisoner for providing food, clothes and other amenities
to him.
We wish to say something more is this connection. We
are told that the practice followed in many States, either by
virtue of the jail rules or by convention, is that a portion
of the money earned by the prisoner is sent to the
dependantts of the prisoner himself and the balance, after
deducting the amount expended by him for his extra expenses,
is preserved to be isbursed to him at the time of his
release.
One area which is totally overlooked in the above
practice is the plight of the victims. It is a recent trend
in sentencing policy to listen to the wailings of the
victims. rehabilitation of the prisoner need not be by
closing the eyes towards the suffering victims of the
offence. A glimpse at the field of victimology reveals two
types of victims. First type consists of direct victims i.e.
those who are alive and suffering on account of the harm
inflicted by the prisoner while committing the crime. Second
type comprises of indirect victims who are dependants of the
direct victims of crimes who undergo sufferings due to
deprivation of their breadwinner.
Restorative and reparative theories have developed
from the aforesaid thinking. In the "Oxfor Handbook of
Criminology", Andrew Ashworth, Prof. of Oxford University
Central for Criminological Research has contributed the
following instructive passage.
"Restorative and Reparative theories
These are not theories of punishment Rather, their
argument is that sentences should move away from
punishment of the offender towards restitution and
reparation, aimed at restoring the harm done and
calculated accordingly. Restorative theories are
therefore victim-centred (see e.g. Wright 1991).
although in some versions they encompass the notion
of reparation to the community for the effects of
crime. They envisage less resort to custody, withhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 11 of 12
onerous community-based sanctions requiring offenders
to work in order to compensate victims and also
contemplating support and counselling for offenders
to reintegrate them into the community. Such
theories therefore tend to act on a behavioural
premise similar to rehabilition, but their political
premise is that compensation for victims should be
recognized as more important than notions of just
punishment on behalf of the State.
Legal systems based or a restorative rationale are
rare, but the increasing tendency to insert victim
orientated measures such as compensation orders into
sentencing systems structured to impose punishment
provides a fine example of Garland’s observation that
institutions are the scenes of particular conflicts
as well as being means to a variety of ends, so it is
no surprise to find that each particular institution
combines a number of often incompatible objectives,
and organizes the relations of often antagonistic
interest groups".
Section 357 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973
provides some reliefs to the victims as the court is
empowered to direct payment of comensation to any person for
any loss or injury caused by the offence. But in practice the
said provision has not proved to be of much effectiveness.
Many persons who are sentenced to log term imprisonment do
not pay the compensation and instead they choose to continue
in jail in default thereof. It is only when fine alone is the
sentence that the convicts invariably choose to remit the
fine. But those are cases in which the harm inflicted on the
victims would have been far less serious. Thus the
restorative and reparative theories are not translated into
real benefits to the victims.
It is a constructive thinking for the State to make
appropriate law for diverting some portion of the income
earned by the prisoner when he is in jail to be paid to
deserving victims. In the absence of any law for that
purpose we are prevented from issuing a direction to set
apart any portion of the prisoner’s earned wages for payment
to the victims because of the interdict contained in Article
300A the Constitution. Hence we suggest that the State
concerned may bring about a legislation for that purpose.
The above discussion leads to the following conclusions:
(1) It is lawful to employ the prisoners sentenced
to rigorous imprisonment to do hard labour whether
he consents to do it or not.
(2) It is open to the jail officials to permit other
prisoners also to do any work which they choose to
do provided such prisoners make a request for that
purpose.
(3) It is imperative that the prisoner should be
paid equitable wages for the work done by them. In
order to determine the quantum of equitable wages
payable to prisoners the State concerned shall
constitute a wage fixation body for making
recommendations. We direct each State to do so as
early as possible.
(4) Until the State Government takes any decision
on such recommendations every prisoner must be paid
wages for the work done by him at such rates or
revised rates as the Government concerned fixes in
the light of the observations made above. For this
purpose we direct all the State Government of fix
the rate of such interim wages within six weeks from
today and report to this Court of compliance of thishttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 12 of 12
direction.
(5) We recommend to the State concerned to make
law for setting apart a portion of the wages earned
by the prisoners to be paid as compensation to
deserving victims of the offence the commission of
which entailed the sentence of imprisonment to the
prisoner, either directly or through a common fund
to be created for this purpose or in any other
feasible mode.
The appeals and the writ petitions are disposed of
in the above terms. registry will despatch a copy of this
judgment to the Chief Secretary to every State Government.