-2-
Jagir Singh was not in a position to make any statement, FIR was not registered.
However, on 6.7.1986, Head Constable Balwinder Singh met Pal Singh in the said
hospital and his statement was recorded and on that basis FIR was registered.
Thereafter, the respondent was charged with the offence under Section 307 IPC and
he faced trial. The injured Jagir Singh was examined as PW3, his uncle Pal Singh
who was the informant was examined as PW2. Balwinder Singh, Head Constable was
examined as PW4 and the Doctor was examined as PW1. The trial Court by its
judgment dated 27.10.1987 held the accused guilty, convicted and sentenced him for
four years R.I. with a fine of Rupees One Thousand under Section 307 IPC. The
appeal filed by the respondent-accused was allowed by the High Court by the
impugned judgment dated 30.10.2002 primarily on the ground that the occurrence
had taken place on 2.7.1986, and the FIR was registered on 6.7.1986, after four days,
and there was no satisfactory explanation as to why Pal Singh waited for four days for
registering the FIR.
3. The learned counsel appearing for the State contended that the injured Jagir
Singh was hospitalised and was not in a position to make any statement to the
police and,
..........3.- 3 -
therefore, it could not be said that the four days' delay was fatal to the case of the
prosecution.
4. The High Court has considered the facts of the case in proper perspective.
The incident occurred in the plot of Pal Singh on 2.7.1986 at 8 p.m. when he was
talking to his nephew Jagir Singh. According to the prosecution case, the accused to
give vent to his anger against Pal Singh attacked Pal Singh in a drunken condition but
the blow landed on Jagir Singh. Admittedly, Pal Singh and other relatives kept Jagir
Singh in the house on 2.7.1986 and took the injured Jagir Singh to hospital on
3.7.1986 and got him admitted. Even assuming that Jagir Singh being injured and
hospitalised, was not in a position to make any statement, there is no satisfactory
explanation as to why neither Pal Singh, who gave the information on 6.7.1986, nor
the other relatives did not give the information about the incident earlier particularly
as the incident occurred in Pal Singh's land and the attack was allegedly directed
against him. The High Court has observed that non-registering of FIR for four days
and failure on the part of Pal Singh and other relatives of Jagir Singh to give timely
information leads to an inference that FIR was recorded after due deliberations and
consultations obviously to implicate the accused.
.....4.- 4 -
5. As noted above, the incident is of the year 1986. The High Court has
allowed the appeal and acquitted the respondent in the year 2002, giving cogent
reasons. We find no reasons to interfere with the said judgment. Appeal is,
accordingly, dismissed.
.....................J.
(R.V. RAVEENDRAN)
.....................J.
(P. SATHASIVAM)
NEW DELHI;
JUNE 26, 2008.