1
2023 INSC 660
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 2207 OF 2023
[ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) No. 3433 OF 2023]
MD. ASFAK ALAM …APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
THE STATE OF JHARKHAND & ANR. …RESPONDENT(S)
J U D G M E N T
S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.
1. On the previous date of hearing, i.e., on 26.07.2023, this Court heard the
counsel for the parties to the Special Leave Petition. But having regard to the
peculiar nature of the impugned order, kept this matter back for orders to be
pronounced today.
2. Special leave granted. The appellant is aggrieved by the denial of
anticipatory bail and a further direction to surrender before the Court and seek
regular bail.
3. The necessary facts are that the appellant and the second respondent
(hereafter referred to as “husband and wife”, respectively) were married on2
5.11.2020. The appellant alleges that the respondent-wife was not happy and
her father used to interfere and pressurize him and his family. This led to
complaints lodged against the wife’s family for threatening the appellant’s
family. It is alleged that on 02.04.2022, without complying with the directions
of Five Judge Bench in Lalita Kumari vs. Govt. of UP &Ors.,1 the concerned
Police Station2, registered the First Information Report (FIR) against the
appellant and his brother and others, complaining of commission of offences
under Section 498A, 323/504/506 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) and
Section 3 & 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.
4. The appellant apprehended arrest and applied for anticipatory bail under
Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) before the
Sessions Judge, Gumla, Jharkhand; that application was dismissed on
28.06.2022. The appellant then approached the Jharkhand High Court seeking
anticipatory bail on 05.07.2022. All this while, the appellant cooperated with
the investigation, and after its completion, a charge-sheet was filed before the
Sessions Judge.
5. Cognizance was taken on 01.10.2022 by the Sessions Court. The Sessions
Court noted in this order that on 08.08.2022, the High Court had protected the
appellant with the interim order directing that he may not be arrested. When the
application was heard by the High Court next on 18.01.2023, without adverting,
the pending anticipatory bail was rejected, and the High Court went on to direct
the appellant to surrender before the competent Court and seek regular bail.
The relevant extracts of the High Court impugned order3 read as follows:
“Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and rival
contentions of the learned counsel, I found that there are serious
allegations against the petitioner that the informant is also being
subjected to cruelty by lodging criminal cases against the family
members just after institution of this case.
1 [2013] 14 SCR 713.
2 Gumla Mahila P.S. in Case No. 07/2022.
3 A.B.A. No. 5771 of 2022 dated 18.01.20233
Considering the rival submission of learned counsels and materials
available against petitioner as well as gravity of allegations, I am not
inclined to grant privilege of anticipatory bail to the petitioner, which
stands rejected.
Petitioner is directed to surrender before the court below and pray for
regular bail, the learned court below shall consider the same on its own
merits, without being prejudiced by this order.”
6. The appellant contends that importance has been placed by the
Constitution on the value of personal liberty, the necessity for arrest before
filing of the charge sheet occurs when the accused’s custodial investigation or
interrogation is essential or in certain cases involving serious offences where the
accused’s possibility of influencing witnesses cannot be ruled out. Learned
counsel contends that an arrest can be made does not mandate that it ought to be
made in every case and emphasised that the distinction between the existence of
the power (to arrest) and the justification of exercising it must always be kept in
mind. It is thus argued that the procedural requirements of Section 41A of the
CrPC must always be followed in this regard.
7. Learned counsel relied upon the decisions of this Court in Arnesh Kumar
v. State of Bihar and Another4, Satender Kumar Antil v. Central Bureau of
Investigation and Another5 and Siddharth v. State of Uttar Pradesh and
Another6 to underline the submissions and also highlighted that it is only if the
Investigating Officer believes that the accused may abscond or disobey
summons then only, he or she needs to be taken into custody.
8. Learned counsel on behalf of the State submitted that the mere fact that a
charge sheet is filed would not per se entitle an accused to the grant of
anticipatory bail, which always remains discretionary. The Court always weighs
the possibility of an accused [depending on his past conduct] of influencing
witnesses or otherwise tampering with evidence. It was highlighted that the
4 [2014] 8 SCR 128.
5 [2022] 10 SCR 351.
6 (2022) 1 SCC 676.4
respondent, who is a complainant in this case, had alleged harassment on a
regular basis by the appellant and his relatives at the matrimonial home just
about one and a half months after their marriage and that she had even been
threatened with loss of life. It was highlighted that according to the
complainant, the threat extended to the one that she would be injected in such a
manner that medical evidence would disclose that she had died of a heart attack.
Analysis
9. This court has emphasised the values of personal liberty in the context of
applying discretion to grant bail. It has been ruled, in a long line of cases that
ordinarily bail ought to be granted and that in serious cases – which are
specified in the provisions of the CrPC (Section 437) which involve allegations
relating to offences carrying long sentences or other special offences, the court
should be circumspect and careful in exercising discretion. The paramount
considerations in cases where bail or anticipatory bail is claimed are the nature
and gravity of the offence, the propensity or ability of the accused to influence
evidence during investigation or interfere with the trial process by threatening
or otherwise trying to influence the witnesses; the likelihood of the accused to
flee from justice and other such considerations. During the trial, the court is
always in control of the proceedings, and it is open for it to impose any
condition which it deems necessary to ensure the accused’s presence and
participation in the trial. The court must, in every case, be guided by these
overarching principles.
10. In the five judge Bench decision of Sushila Aggarwal v. State (NCT of
Delhi)7, this court had occasion to review past decisions, including considering
the judgment in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v State of Punjab8 and decide whether
imposition of conditions limiting the order of pre-arrest bail, particularly when
7 2020 (2) SCR 1
8 1980] 3 SCR 3835
charge-sheet is filed, is warranted. The court held, inter alia, in its judgment
(M.R. Shah, J) that:
“7.6. Thus, considering the observations made by the Constitution Bench
of this Court in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia [Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State
of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465] , the court may, if
there are reasons for doing so, limit the operation of the order to a short
period only after filing of an FIR in respect of the matter covered by
order and the applicant may in such case be directed to obtain an order
of bail under Sections 437 or 439 of the Code within a reasonable short
period after the filing of the FIR. The Constitution Bench has further
observed that the same need not be followed as an invariable rule. It is
further observed and held that normal rule should be not to limit the
operation of the order in relation to a period of time. We are of the
opinion that the conditions can be imposed by the court concerned while
granting pre-arrest bail order including limiting the operation of the
order in relation to a period of time if the circumstances so warrant,
more particularly the stage at which the “anticipatory bail” application
is moved, namely, whether the same is at the stage before the FIR is filed
or at the stage when the FIR is filed and the investigation is in progress
or at the stage when the investigation is complete and the charge-sheet is
filed. However, as observed hereinabove, the normal rule should be not
to limit the order in relation to a period of time.”
The concurring view expressed (by the author of this judgment) was:
“85.3. Section 438 CrPC does not compel or oblige courts to impose
conditions limiting relief in terms of time, or upon filing of FIR, or
recording of statement of any witness, by the police, during investigation
or inquiry, etc. While weighing and considering an application (for grant
of anticipatory bail) the court has to consider the nature of the offence,
the role of the person, the likelihood of his influencing the course of
investigation, or tampering with evidence (including intimidating
witnesses), likelihood of fleeing justice (such as leaving the country), etc.
The courts would be justified — and ought to impose conditions spelt out
in Section 437(3) CrPC [by virtue of Section 438(2)]. The necessity to
impose other restrictive conditions, would have to be weighed on a case-
by-case basis, and depending upon the materials produced by the State
or the investigating agency. Such special or other restrictive conditions
may be imposed if the case or cases warrant, but should not be imposed
in a routine manner, in all cases. Likewise, conditions which limit the
grant of anticipatory bail may be granted, if they are required in the facts
of any case or cases; however, such limiting conditions may not be
invariably imposed.
*********************************6
85.4. Courts ought to be generally guided by the considerations such as
nature and gravity of the offences, the role attributed to the applicant,
and the facts of the case, while assessing whether to grant anticipatory
bail, or refusing it. Whether to grant or not is a matter of discretion;
equally whether, and if so, what kind of special conditions are to be
imposed (or not imposed) are dependent on facts of the case, and subject
to the discretion of the court.
85.5. Anticipatory bail granted can, depending on the conduct and
behaviour of the accused, continue after filing of the charge-sheet till end
of trial. Also orders of anticipatory bail should not be “blanket” in the
sense that it should not enable the accused to commit further offences
and claim relief. It should be confined to the offence or incident, for
which apprehension of arrest is sought, in relation to a specific incident.
It cannot operate in respect of a future incident that involves commission
of an offence.
*********************************
87. The history of our Republic — and indeed, the Freedom Movement
has shown how the likelihood of arbitrary arrest and indefinite detention
and the lack of safeguards played an important role in rallying the
people to demand Independence. Witness the Rowlatt Act, the nationwide
protests against it, the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre and several other
incidents, where the general public were exercising their right to protest
but were brutally suppressed and eventually jailed for long. The spectre
of arbitrary and heavy-handed arrests : too often, to harass and
humiliate citizens, and oftentimes, at the interest of powerful individuals
(and not to further any meaningful investigation into offences) led to the
enactment of Section 438. Despite several Law Commission Reports and
recommendations of several committees and commissions, arbitrary and
groundless arrests continue as a pervasive phenomenon. Parliament has
not thought it appropriate to curtail the power or discretion of the courts,
in granting pre-arrest or anticipatory bail, especially regarding the
duration, or till charge-sheet is filed, or in serious crimes. Therefore, it
would not be in the larger interests of society if the Court, by judicial
interpretation, limits the exercise of that power : the danger of such an
exercise would be that in fractions, little by little, the discretion,
advisedly kept wide, would shrink to a very narrow and unrecognisably
tiny portion, thus frustrating the objective behind the provision, which
has stood the test of time, these 46 years.”
11. The decisions cited by counsel are useful and valuable guides with
respect to the powers of the police, the discretion and the duties of the court in
several kinds of cases, including those relating to the matrimonial offences such
as 498A of IPC, and other cases. In Arnesh Kumar (supra), it was held that:7
“9. From a plain reading of the aforesaid provision, it is evident that a
person accused of an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years
with or without fine, cannot be arrested by the police officer only on his
satisfaction that such person had committed the offence punishable as
aforesaid. A police officer before arrest, in such cases has to be further
satisfied that such arrest is necessary to prevent such person from
committing any further offence; or for proper investigation of the case;
or to prevent the accused from causing the evidence of the offence to
disappear; or tampering with such evidence in any manner; or to prevent
such person from making any inducement, threat or promise to a witness
so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the court or the police
officer; or unless such accused person is arrested, his presence in the
court whenever required cannot be ensured. These are the conclusions,
which one may reach based on facts. The law mandates the police officer
to state the facts and record the reasons in writing which led him to come
to a conclusion covered by any of the provisions aforesaid, while making
such arrest. The law further requires the police officers to record the
reasons in writing for not making the arrest. In pith and core, the police
officer before arrest must put a question to himself, why arrest? Is it
really required? What purpose it will serve? What object it will achieve?
It is only after these questions are addressed and one or the other
conditions as enumerated above is satisfied, the power of arrest needs to
be exercised. In fine, before arrest first the police officers should have
reason to believe on the basis of information and material that the
accused has committed the offence. Apart from this, the police officer has
to be satisfied further that the arrest is necessary for one or the more
purposes envisaged by sub-clauses (a) to (e) of clause (1) of Section 41
CrPC.”
The court also issued valuable directions to be followed by the police authorities
and the courts, in all cases where the question of grant of bail arises. Further, the
court had underlined the centrality to personal liberty in its decision in
Siddharth (supra):
“10. We may note that personal liberty is an important aspect of our
constitutional mandate. The occasion to arrest an accused during
investigation arises when custodial investigation becomes necessary or it
is a heinous crime or where there is a possibility of influencing the
witnesses or accused may abscond. Merely because an arrest can be
made because it is lawful does not mandate that arrest must be made. A
distinction must be made between the existence of the power to arrest
and the justification for exercise of it. If arrest is made routine, it can
cause incalculable harm to the reputation arid self-esteem of a person. If
the investigating officer has no reason to believe that the accused will
abscond or disobey summons and has, in fact, throughout cooperated8
with the investigation we fail to appreciate why there should be a
compulsion on the officer to arrest the accused.”
12. In the present case, this Court is of the opinion that there are no startling
features or elements that stand out or any exceptional fact disentitling the
appellant to the grant of anticipatory bail. What is important is not that the
matrimonial relationship soured almost before the couple could even settle
down but whether allegations levelled against the appellant are true or partly
true at this stage, which at best would be matters of conjecture, at least for this
Court. However, what is a matter of record is that the time when the anticipatory
bail was pending can be divided into two parts - firstly, when there was no
protection afforded to him through any interim order (between April 2022 and
08.08.2022). Secondly, it was on 08.08.2022 that the High Court granted an
order effectively directing the police not to arrest him during the pendency of
his application under Section 438 of the CrPC. Significantly, the investigation
was completed, and chargesheet was filed after 08.08.2022, and in fact
cognizance was taken on 01.10.2022 by the Sessions Judge. These factors were
of importance, and though the High Court has noticed the factors but interpreted
them in an entirely different light. What appears from the record is that the
appellant cooperated with the investigation both before 08.08.2022, when no
protection was granted to him and after 08.08.2022, when he enjoyed protection
till the filing of the chargesheet and the cognizance thereof on 01.10.2022.
Thus, once the chargesheet was filed and there was no impediment, at least on
the part of the accused, the court having regard to the nature of the offences, the
allegations and the maximum sentence of the offences they were likely to carry,
ought to have granted the bail as a matter of course. However, the court did not
do so but mechanically rejected and, virtually, to rub salt in the wound directed
the appellant to surrender and seek regular bail before the Trial Court.
Therefore, in the opinion of this court, the High Court fell into error in adopting
such a casual approach. The impugned order of rejecting the bail and directing9
the appellant, to surrender and later seek bail, therefore, cannot stand, and is
hereby set aside. Before parting, the court would
direct all the courts ceased of proceedings to strictly follow the law laid down in
Arnesh Kumar (supra) and reiterate the directions contained thereunder, as well
as other directions:
“I. 11. Our endeavour in this judgment is to ensure that police
officers do not arrest the accused unnecessarily and Magistrate
do not authorize detention casually and mechanically. In order
to, ensure what we have observed above, we give the following
directions:
11.1. All the State Governments to instruct its police officers not
to automatically arrest when a case under Section 498-A IPC is
registered but to satisfy themselves about the necessity for arrest
under the parameters laid down above flowing from Section 41
CrPC;
11.2. All police officers be provided with a check list containing
specified sub-clauses under Section 41(1)(b)(ii);
11.3. The police officer- shall forward the check list duly filled
and furnish the reasons and materials which necessitated the
arrest, while forwarding/producing the accused before the
Magistrate for further detention;
11.4. The Magistrate while authorizing detention of the accused
shall peruse the report furnished by the police officer in terms
aforesaid and only after recording its satisfaction, the Magistrate
will authorize detention;
11.5. The decision not to arrest an accused, be forwarded to the
Magistrate within two weeks from the date of the institution of
the case with a copy to the Magistrate which may be extended by
the Superintendent of Police of the district for the reasons to be
recorded in writing;
11.6. Notice of appearance in terms of Section 41-A CrPC be
served on the accused within two weeks from the date of
institution of the case, which may be extended by the10
Superintendent of Police of the district for the reasons to be
recorded in writing;
11.7. Failure to comply with the directions aforesaid shall apart
from rendering the police officers concerned liable for
departmental action, they shall also be liable to be punished for
contempt of court to be instituted before the High Court having
territorial jurisdiction.
11.8. Authorizing detention without recording reasons as
aforesaid by the Judicial Magistrate concerned shall be liable for
departmental action by the appropriate High Court.
12. We hasten to add that the directions aforesaid shall not only
apply to the case under Section 498-A IPC or Section 4 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act, the case in hand, but also such cases
where offence is punishable with imprisonment for a terms
which may be less than seven years or which may extend to
seven years, whether with or without fine.”
II. The High Court shall frame the above directions in the form of
notifications and guidelines to be followed by the Sessions courts and
all other and criminal courts dealing with various offences.
III. Likewise, the Director General of Police in all States shall ensure that
strict instructions in terms of above directions are issued. Both the
High Courts and the DGP’s of all States shall ensure that such
guidelines and Directives/Departmental Circulars are issued for
guidance of all lower courts and police authorities in each State within
eight weeks from today.
IV. Affidavits of compliance shall be filed before this court within ten
weeks by all the states and High Courts, though their Registrars.11
13. The appeal is accordingly allowed in the above terms. The appellant is
directed to be enlarged on bail subject to such terms and conditions that the
Trial Court may impose. The High Courts and the Police Authorities in all
States are required to comply with the above directions in the manner spelt out
in the para above, within the time frame mentioned.
...…....................................J.
[S. RAVINDRA BHAT]
…......................................J.
[ARAVIND KUMAR]
NEW DELHI;
JULY 31, 2023