http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 5
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 548 of 2007
PETITIONER:
Harpal Singh
RESPONDENT:
State of Punjab
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 04/12/2007
BENCH:
G.P. Mathur & G.S. Singhvi
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 548 OF 2007
G. P. MATHUR, J.
This Appeal has been preferred under Section 19 of the
Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 against the
judgment and order dated 16.3.2007 of Designated Court, Kapurthala
at Jalandhar in TADA Sessions Case No. 4 of 2006 by which the
appellant has been convicted under Section 5 of the Explosive
Substances Act, 1908 and has been sentenced to 5 years R.I. and a
fine of Rs.1,000/-.
2. The case of the prosecution, in brief, is that on 12.3.1992
Kamaljit Singh, SHO, Santokh Singh, SI and some other police
personnel were going from village Kukar Pind to village Raipur in
connection with investigation of a case bearing FIR No. 31 under
Section 302/34 IPC, Section 25 Arms Act and Sections 3, 4 and 5 of
Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (hereinafter
referred to as ’TADA’). When they reached on Byen Bridge in
village Kukar Pind, they saw a person coming on foot. On seeing the
police party he tried to run away but he was apprehended after a chase
and on inquiry he disclosed his name as Harpal Singh (appellant in
this appeal). On his personal search explosive powder wrapped in a
glazed paper was recovered from the "jhola" (bag) which he was
having in his right hand. The bag contained one kilogram explosive
powder which was taken into possession. A ruka was sent to the
police station on the basis of which FIR was registered against the
appellant.
3. After investigation and receipt of the sanction and report of the
Forensic Science Laboratory charge-sheet was submitted in the court
on 24.2.1994 for prosecution of the appellant under Sections 4, 5, and
9B(b) of the Explosives Act, 1884. There was no mention of any
offence under TADA or under the Explosive Substances Act, 1908.
The charge-sheet was submitted in the Designated Court which took
cognizance of the offence and proceeded with the trial of the
appellant. Ultimately the Designated Court acquitted the appellant for
the offences under TADA and the Explosives Act, 1884, but
convicted him only under Section 5 of the Explosive Substances Act,
1908 and sentenced him to 5 years R.I. and a fine of Rs.1,000/-.
4. Shri Sushil Kumar, learned senior counsel for the appellant, has
submitted that the case against the appellant is not established from
the evidence adduced by the prosecution but instead of going into the
facts and appraisal of evidence the appeal can be allowed on a legal
ground.
5. Part III of TADA deals with Designated Courts. Sub-sectionhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 5
(1) of Section 9 of TADA provides that the Central Government or a
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute one or more Designated Courts for such area or areas, or for
such case or class or group of case as may be specified in the
notification. Sub-section (1) of Section 11 of TADA lays down that
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, every offence punishable under any provision of this Act
or any rule made thereunder shall be triable only by the Designated
Court within whose local jurisdiction it was committed or, as the case
may be, by the Designated Court constituted for trying such offence
under sub-section (1) of Section 9. Sections 12 and 18 of TADA read
as under:-
"12. Power of Designated Courts with respect
to other offences. - (1) When trying any offence, a
Designated Court may also try any other offence with
which the accused may, under the Code, be charged at
the same trial if the offence is connected with such other
offence.
(2) If, in the course of any trial under this Act, of
any offence, it is found that the accused person has
committed any other offence under this Act or any rule
made thereunder or under any other law, the Designated
Court may convict such person of such other offence and
pass any sentence authorised by this Act or such rule or,
as the case may be, such other law, for the punishment
thereof."
"18. Power to transfer cases to regular courts. -
Where, after taking cognizance of any offence, a
Designated Court is of opinion that the offence is not
triable by it, shall, notwithstanding that it had no
jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer the case for the
trial of such offence to any court having jurisdiction
under the Code and the court to which the case is
transferred may proceed with the trial of the offence as if
it had taken cognizance of the offence."
By Act No. 43 of 1993 Section 20-A was introduced in TADA with
effect from 22.5.1993 and the said section reads as under: -
"20-A. Cognizance of offence. - (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code, no information about the
commission of an offence under this Act shall be
recorded by the police without the prior approval of the
District Superintendent of Police.
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence
under this Act without the previous sanction of the
Inspector-General of Police, or as the case may be, the
Commissioner of Police."
Therefore, with effect from 22.5.1993, in view of sub-section (1) of
Section 20-A, no FIR about the commission of an offence under
TADA can be recorded by the police without prior approval of the
District Superintendent of Police. Similarly on account of sub-section
(2) of Section 20-A no court can take cognizance of any offence under
TADA without the previous sanction of the Inspector General of
Police, or as the case may be, the Commissioner of Police. The effect
of this amendment is that the Designated Court is debarred from
taking cognizance of any offence under TADA without the previous
sanction of the Inspector General of Police or, as the case may be, the
Commissioner of Police.
6. As mentioned earlier, the alleged recovery of the incriminating
article from the appellant took place on 12.3.1992 and the case was
registered under Sections 4 and 5 of the Explosives Act, 1884. The
police, after investigation, submitted charge-sheet before thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 5
Designated Court on 24.2.1994. In the charge-sheet there was no
reference to any case under TADA or under the Explosive Substances
Act, 1908 against the appellant. The appellant was granted bail in the
case under the Explosives Act on 1.7.1992. Thereafter he went away
to USA and applied for political asylum. He was declared as
absconder on 20.1.1995. The US authorities deported him to India in
2006. Thereafter the police submitted supplementary charge-sheet
against the appellant on 29.5.2006 for his prosecution under TADA
and the Explosive Substances Act. The Designated Court thereafter
tried the appellant for offences under TADA besides Sections 4 and 5
of the Explosives Act and also under Sections 4 and 5 of the
Explosive Substances Act.
7. The important feature which is to be noted is that the
prosecution did not obtain sanction of the Inspector General of Police
or of the Commissioner of Police for prosecution of the appellant
under TADA at any stage as is required by Section 20-A(2) of TADA.
The trial of the appellant before the Designated Court proceeded
without the sanction of the Inspector General of Police or the
Commissioner of Police. In absence of previous sanction the
Designated Court had no jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence
or to proceed with the trial of the appellant under TADA.
8. The Designated Court, while trying an offence under TADA, is
undoubtedly empowered to try any other offence with which the
accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, be charged at the
same trial if the offence is connected with such other offence in view
of Section 12 of TADA and may convict such person of such other
offence and may pass any sentence authorized by TADA or by such
other law for the punishment thereof. But for application of Section
12 it is absolutely essential that the Designated Court should be trying
an offence under TADA. If the Designated Court is not trying an
offence under TADA it will have no jurisdiction to try any other
offence. Section 18 also points out the same situation which says that
where, after taking cognizance of any offence, a Designated Court is
of opinion that the offence is not triable by it, shall, notwithstanding
that it had no jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer the case for the
trial of such offence to any court having jurisdiction under the Code of
Criminal Procedure. Thus the Designated Court gets the jurisdiction
to try any other offence only if it has the jurisdiction and is trying an
offence under TADA. In Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi vs.
Jitendra Bhimraj Bijja and others AIR 1990 SC 1962, it was observed
as under: -
"Section 12(1) no doubt empowers the Designated Court
to try any offence punishable under any other statute
along with the offence punishable under the Act if the
former is connected with the latter. That, however, does
not mean that even when the Designated Court comes to
the conclusion that there exists no sufficient ground for
framing a charge against the accused under S.3(1) it must
proceed to try the accused for the commission of offences
under other statutes. That would tantamount to usurping
jurisdiction. Section 18, therefore, in terms provides that
where after taking cognizance of any offence the
Designated Court is of the opinion that the offence is not
triable by it, it shall, notwithstanding that it has no
jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer the case for the
trial of such offence to any Court having jurisdiction
under the Code."
9. At this stage it will be useful to refer to the dictionary meaning
of the word ’Jurisdiction’: -
Black’s Law Dictionary : "Court’s power to decide a case
or issue a decree".
Words and Phrases \026 Legally defined \026 Third Edition
(p.497) : "By ’jurisdiction’ is meant the authority which a
court has to decide matters that are litigated before it orhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 5
to take cognizance of matters presented in a formal way
for its decision. The limits of this authority are imposed
by the statute, charter, or commission under which the
court is constituted, and may be extended or restricted by
similar means. If no restriction or limit is imposed the
jurisdiction is said to be unlimited. A limitation may be
either as to the kind and nature of the actions and matters
of which the particular court has cognizance, or as to the
area over which the jurisdiction extends."
Law Lexicon by P. Ramanatha Aiyar \026 2nd Edn. Reprint
2000 : "An authority or power, which a man hath to do
justice in causes of complaint brought before him
(Tomlin’s Law Dic.). The power to hear and determine
the particular case involved; the power of a Court or a
judge to entertain an action, petition, or other proceeding;
the legal power of hearing and determining controversies.
As applied to a particular claim or controversy,
jurisdiction is the power to hear and determine the
controversy."
Jurisdiction, therefore, means the authority or power to entertain, hear
and decide a case and to do justice in the case and determine the
controversy. In absence of jurisdiction the court has no power to hear
and decide the matter and the order passed by it would be a nullity.
10. As mentioned earlier, in the first charge-sheet which was filed
on 24.2.1994 there was no mention of TADA at all. It was in the
supplementary charge-sheet filed on 29.5.2006 that the prosecution
introduced the offence under TADA. But there was no sanction of the
Inspector General of Police or of the Commissioner of Police as
required under Section 20-A(2) of TADA and, therefore, the
Designated Court had no jurisdiction to take cognizance of the
offence. Since the Designated Court lacked inherent jurisdiction to
try the offence under TADA it could not have tried the appellant even
for offences under the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 or the
Explosives Act, 1884. Thus the conviction of the appellant under
Section 5 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 is illegal.
11. The aforesaid view has also been taken by this Court in
Rambhai Nathabhai Gadhvi and others vs. State of Gujarat (1997) 7
SCC 744 and para 8 of the report is reproduced below: -
"8. Taking cognizance is the act which the Designated
Court has to perform and granting sanction is an act
which the sanctioning authority has to perform. Latter is
a condition precedent for the former. Sanction
contemplated in the sub-section is the permission to
prosecute a particular person for the offence or offences
under TADA. Sanction is not granted to the Designated
Court to take cognizance of the offence, but it is granted
to the prosecuting agency to approach the court
concerned for enabling it to take cognizance of the
offence and to proceed to trial against the persons
arraigned in the report. Thus a valid sanction is sine qua
non for enabling the prosecuting agency to approach the
court in order to enable the court to take cognizance of
the offence under TADA as disclosed in the report. The
corollary is that, if there was no valid sanction the
Designated Court gets no jurisdiction to try a case against
any person mentioned in the report as the court is
forbidden from taking cognizance of the offence without
such sanction. If the Designated Court has taken
cognizance of the offence without a valid sanction, such
action is without jurisdiction and any proceedings
adopted thereunder will also be without jurisdiction."
12. In view of the discussion made above there cannot be any
escape from the conclusion that the Designated Court had nohttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 5
jurisdiction to try and convict the appellant under the Explosive
Substances Act, 1908 in view of the fact that it could not have taken
cognizance of the offence under TADA for lack of sanction by the
competent authority under Section 20-A(2) of TADA. In view of the
fact that the Designated Court could not try the offence under TADA
being debarred from taking cognizance thereof on account of want of
sanction by the competent authority under the mandatory provisions
of Section 20-A(2), it could not try any offence under any other Act as
well.
13. The appeal is accordingly allowed and the conviction of the
appellant under Section 5 of the Explosive Substances Act and the
sentence imposed thereunder are set aside. The appellant shall be
released forthwith unless wanted in some other case.