REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 900 OF 2006
Jaswinder Singh …. Appellant
Versus
State of Punjab …. Respondent
JUDGMENT
Dr. Mukundakam Sharma, J.
1. This appeal is filed by the appellant who stands convicted by the Court of
Addl. Sessions Judge (Ad hoc), Hoshiarpur, Punjab under Section 302
read with Section 34 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as
‘the IPC’) and also under Section 307 IPC which is affirmed by the High
Court of Punjab and Haryana and aggrieved by which the present appeal is
filed in this Court.
2. Briefly stated the prosecution case is that a criminal case was registered on
the basis of the statement of Jasprit Singh, the complainant and PW-1, who
stated in his report that he was residing in village Parowal for the last 12years in the house of Joginder Singh and on 17.01.2001 at about 7.00 p.m.
when he was sitting with his landlord’s son Jasbir Singh alias Tota and
watching television while sitting on a double bed in the room, somebody
from outside called Tota whereupon the complainant opened the door and
found two young persons standing outside. Both of them enquired about
Jasbir Singh alias Tota upon which the complainant took them inside
where Tota was sitting. Then Jasbir Singh alias Tota asked the
complainant to bring tea for those persons and the complainant went inside
the house to tell the mother of Jasbir Singh alias Tota to prepare tea. In the
meantime he heard gun shot fire from the room and hearing the shot he
immediately went to that room. On entering the room he saw the young
man firing shots on the head of Tota and the other young man saying that
Tota should not be left alive. The complainant alleged that he caught hold
of the young man who fired at Tota and then the other young man, who
was wearing a ‘Patka’, told the complainant pointing pistol towards him
that he would also be killed along with Tota and then he fired the shot
which hit the complainant on the finger of his left hand and left ankle as
the complainant had caught the hand of that man in which he was holding
the pistol. Upon complainant raising the alarm Joginder Singh, the father
of Jasbir Singh alias Tota, the deceased namely and Shiv Charan Singh,
2the father of Jasprit Singh, the complainant reached there. The man
wearing patka ran away from the spot while firing shots and the other
young man who also tried to run away was overpowered and the pistol was
snatched away from his hand. The said young man was identified later as
Charanjit Singh and the other young man with a patka accompanying
Charanjit Singh was identified as Jaswinder Singh. In the meantime,
Jasbir Singh alias Tota fell on the bed and number of villagers collected
there. He was taken to the Civil Hospital, Garhshankar along with
complainant where he succumbed to the injuries whereas complainant was
medically examined. Sub-Inspector Gian Chand came to the hospital and
recorded the statement of complainant on the basis of which the criminal
case was registered.
3. During the course of investigation Sub-Inspector Gian Chand took into
possession the pistol and the licence of Charanjit Singh, the accused. He
visited the place of incident on 18.01.2001, prepared a rough site plan and
recorded the statements of the witnesses. He took into possession three
empty cartridges, two led bullets of the cartridges, bloodstained bed sheet
from the spot along with cap and a scooter bearing Registration No. PI Q-
68. He also prepared inquest report on the dead body of Jasbir Singh alias
3Tota, the deceased. The post-mortem examination was conducted by the
doctor.
4. On completion of the investigation he submitted charge-sheet against
Charanjit Singh, Jaswinder Singh, Balbir Singh, Avtar Singh and Amarjit
Singh. It transpired that Balbir Singh, Avtar Singh and Amarjit Singh had
conspired with Jaswinder Singh and Charanjit Singh to commit the murder
of Jasbir Singh as he was instrumental in arranging the love marriage of
daughter of Balbir Singh.
5. According to the prosecution, Balbir Singh had hired the contract killers
for eliminating Jasbir Singh alias Tota for arranging marriage of his
daughter with one Jugraj Singh because Balbir Singh did not want his
daughter to marry that man. The police could, however, arrest only
Charanjit Singh, Jaswinder Singh and Balbir Singh initially. Therefore,
Charanjit Singh, Jaswinder Singh and Balbir Singh were challaned and
Avtar Singh and Amarjit Singh were declared as proclaimed offenders.
Later on Amarjit Singh was also arrested and his supplementary challan
was presented and committed to the court. Those four accused persons
4namely Charanjit Singh, Jaswinder Singh, Balbir Singh and Amarjit Singh
were, therefore, tried whereas Avtar Singh was still a proclaimed offender.
6. After submission of the charge-sheet, charges were framed under Section
120-B, 302/34, 307/34, 449 IPC and under Section 27 of the Arms Act.
When the charges were read over and explained to the accused they
pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
7. During the course of trial the prosecution examined as many as 11
witnesses and at the end of their deposition the accused persons were
examined under Section 313 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for
short ‘the CrPC’). The defence examined the witness Satnam Singh as
DW-1. The trial court, namely the Court of the Addl. Sessions Judge (Ad
hoc), Hoshiarpur, Punjab, after hearing the arguments of the counsel
appearing for the parties and on examination of the entire records
including the depositions and all the statements found accused Charanjit
Singh, Jaswinder Singh and Balbir Singh guilty and convicted and
sentenced them by its judgment and order dated 18.09.2003.
8. Balbir Singh was found guilty under Section 120-B read with Section 302
IPC and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment and to pay a fine of
Rs. 1000/- and in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous
5imprisonment for one month. Charanjit Singh was found guilty under
Section 302 and 307/34 IPC and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment
and to pay a fine of Rs. 1000/- and in default of payment of fine to further
undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month for offence under Section
302 and to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five years and to pay a fine
of Rs. 1000/- and in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous
imprisonment for one month for offence under Section 307/34 IPC.
Jaswinder Singh was found guilty under Section 302/34 and 307 IPC and
sentence to undergo life imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs. 1000/- and
in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for
one month for offence under Section 302/34 IPC and to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for five years and to pay a fine of Rs. 1000/- and in default
of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for one
month for offence under Section 307 IPC.
9. The trial court also found both Charanjit Singh and Jaswinder Singh guilty
under Section 449 IPC and under Sections 27/54/59 of Arms Act and
sentenced each of them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five years
and to pay a fine of Rs. 1000/- each and in default of payment of fine to
further undergo rigorous imprisonment for one month for offence under
Section 449 IPC and to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years
6each and to pay a fine of Rs. 500/- each and in default of payment of fine
to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for 15 days each.
10.All the aforesaid substantive sentences were, however, ordered to run
concurrently. Amarjit Singh was, however, given benefit of doubt and he
was acquitted of all the charges leveled against him.
11.Being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order of conviction and
sentence accused Balbir Singh, Charanjit Singh and Jaswinder Singh have
filed three separate appeals in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana. The
said appeals were entertained and disposed of by a common order dated
23.09.2005 passed by the High Court.
12.After hearing the counsel appearing for the parties, the appeals filed by
accused Charanjit Singh and Jaswinder Singh were dismissed thereby
upholding the order of conviction and sentence passed against them by the
trial court. So far accused Balbir Singh is concerned, his participation in
the commission of crime was held to be highly doubtful and so was his
conviction under Section 120-B IPC. Consequently, the impugned
judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed against him was set
aside and he was acquitted of all the charges framed against him.
713.During the course of hearing learned counsel appearing for the parties
submitted before us that to their information Charanjit Singh has not filed
any appeal and only accused Jaswinder Singh has filed the present appeal.
14.We heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and have also gone
through the entire records.
15.It was very forcefully argued before us by Ms. Anu Mehta, learned
counsel appearing for the appellant that the appellant was neither named in
the first information report nor any specific role and description of his
participation had been given therein and that he was arrested from his
house only on 10.02.2001, i.e. about after 25 days of the date of incident.
It was submitted that the appellant was arrested only on suspicion and
without there being any material or specific evidence against him and that
the entire prosecution case against him is a got up story and therefore he
was liable to be acquitted of all the charges. She also submitted that the
Test Identification Parade (for short ‘the TIP’) was not held because the
appellant was shown to the prosecution witnesses before any TIP could be
held and consequently there was no justification for holding a TIP and in
absence of the same both the courts below should have held that the
identity of the accused was not established in the trial. Counsel appearing
8for the appellant also had taken us through the evidence on record and on
the basis thereof she submitted that so far the appellant is concerned, there
are a number of contradictions in the prosecution case and, therefore, he is
required to be acquitted. It was also submitted that the role ascribed to the
appellant in the incident was highly improbable and unreliable in as much
as while holding Jasbir Singh alias Tota, the deceased as alleged by the
prosecution, the appellant was using both his hands and, therefore, he
could not have brought out his pistol and fired from the said pistol on the
injured witness, P.W.1.
16.Counsel appearing for the respondent-State, however, refuted all the
aforesaid submissions contending inter alia that the identity of both the
accused persons namely Charanjit Singh and Jaswinder Singh, the sole
appellant herein were clearly established in trial. He heavily relied on the
evidence of Jasprit Singh, PW-1, the injured eye-witness and also on
medical evidence to substantiate that the appellant is guilty of the charges
framed against him.
17.On a careful analysis of the facts and circumstances of the present case we
find that Jasprit Singh, PW-1 as also the complainant, is the person who
opened the door so as to enable both the accused persons namely Charanjit
9Singh and Jaswinder Singh to enter the house of Joginder Singh at the time
when the incident took place. He himself took both of them to the room
where Jasbir Singh alias Tota, the deceased was watching television with
the complainant just before the occurrence. He also categorically stated in
his statement that he had seen Charanjit Singh firing a shot with his pistol
on the head of Jasbir Singh alias Tota, the deceased while the other young
man wearing a patka was catching hold of the deceased and saying that he
(the deceased) should not be spared that day. On seeing that situation
Jasprit Singh, the complainant caught hold of Charanjit Singh and at that
stage Jaswinder Singh, the present appellant who was wearing a patka took
out a pistol from the fold of his trouser and fired at Jasprit Singh, the
complainant. It has also come in evidence that when the present appellant
was about to fire his pistol the complainant pulled his pistol downward and
as such fire shot from his pistol had hit at the finger of his left hand and
left foot near his ankle. In the meantime, on hearing a noise raised by the
complainant, Joginder Singh, the father of Jasbir Singh alias Tota, the
deceased and Shiv Charan Singh, the father of Jasprit Singh, the
complainant immediately came to the spot from inside the house and on
their arrival Charanjit Singh and Jaswinder Singh, the present appellant
tried to run away from there. While fleeing away, the present appellant
10fired shots from his pistol but the other accused person was overpowered
and given beatings with fists and his pistol was also snatched. The nabbed
accused person came to be identified as Charanjit Singh. The driving
license of Charanjit Singh was with him which was recovered and which
gave his complete identity. In the meantime, Jasbir Singh alias Tota, the
deceased fell down on the bed and blood started oozing out from his head.
Jasprit Singh, the complainant was also bleeding from his left finger and
ankle. The deceased was taken to the hospital along with Jasprit Singh,
the complainant. Jasbir Singh, the deceased died on way to the hospital
and accordingly his post-mortem was conducted in the hospital whereas
Jasprit Singh, the complainant was medically examined and treated by the
doctor of the hospital.
18.We have a solitary eye-witness namely Jasprit Singh, the complainant as
well as PW-1, who was present in the room where the incident had taken
place. All along he was sitting with Jasbir Singh alias Tota, the deceased
and watching television. He opened the door for both the accused persons
to enable them to come inside the house, took both of them to the room
where Jasbir Singh alias Tota, the deceased was sitting. He saw Charanjit
Singh firing upon the deceased and also grappled with him whereupon he
was fired upon by the co-accused namely Jaswinder Singh (the appellant
11herein), who however, managed to flee away after the occurrence by firing
from his pistol. The evidence of the solitary eye-witness is also supported
by the medical evidence and, therefore, there is no reason as to why such
evidence should not be held to be trustworthy and reliable. Jasprit Singh
(PW-1) is the lone eye-witness of the crime who had seen the actual
occurrence of the incident. He vividly described the whole occurrence that
has occurred inside the room. The said evidence on record, according to
us, inspires confidence in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
19.A very strong argument was made before us by the defence in respect of
the identity of the appellant particularly on the ground that he was shown
to the witness before any TIP could be held. On going through the records
we find that the accused-appellant has refused to take part in the TIP
taking up the plea that he was already shown to Jasprit Singh, PW-1 by the
police. We cannot accept the aforesaid plea taken by the accused-
appellant for the simple reason that PW-1 had occasion to see the appellant
not only when he opened the door but also when he took both of them to
the room where Jasbir Singh alias Tota, the deceased was watching the
television. Moreover, he grappled with both of them. He himself received
gun shot injuries in his hand as also on leg from the gun fired by the
appellant. He described the whole incident in his deposition as to how he
12received those injuries. He had seen the appellant accused from close
quarter and also for a reasonable time. He has also identified the accused-
appellant in the court as the person who had fired upon him. His evidence
is corroborated by the medical evidence of the doctor who examined him.
Therefore, there could be no dispute with regard to the identity of the
accused – appellant.
20.On reading the evidence of the aforesaid eye-witness namely Jasprit Singh
(PW-1) we find the same to be convincing, reliable and trustworthy. We
find no reason to disbelieve the aforesaid statement of PW-1 and
consequently, we find no merit in this appeal, which is dismissed
accordingly.
...............………………………J.
[Dr. Mukundakam Sharma]
…................………………..J.
[Dr. B.S. Chauhan]
New Delhi,
July 7, 2009
1314