NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 900 OF 2017
Nanjundappa & Anr. … Appellants
Vs.
The State of Karnataka …Respondent
JUDGMENT
KRISHNA MURARI, J.
1. This Appeal challenges the judgment and Order
dated 07.02.2017 passed by the High Court of Karnataka
at Bengaluru in Criminal Revision Petition No.
1048/2010 dismissing the Petition filed by the appellants
herein. The High Court confirmed the Judgment and
Order of the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court
convicting the Appellants under Section 304(A) read with
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code (for short ‘IPC’) and
1sentencing them to undergo Simple Imprisonment for 1
year and 3 months and penalty of Rs. 3000/­ each with
default stipulation of Simple Imprisonment for 3 months.
2. Facts shorn of unnecessary details as unfolded by
prosecution are as under:
On 21.11.2003 at around 1.00p.m. Sri Uday Shankar
S/o PW2 was watching TV in his house at Molakalmuru
Town, New Police Quarter No. 13, when there was a
sudden sound in the TV. Noticing the sound, the
deceased got up to separate the dish wire, the TV
connection wire and the telephone wire, which were
entwined together. At this point, he felt an electric shock
and his right hand was burnt and as a result of this
shock he succumbed to death. Upon enquiry, during the
course of investigation, it was found that Appellant No. 2,
who was a daily wage worker working under the
supervision of Appellant no. 1, an employee in the
telephone department, had, while working on the DP
2Pole, pulled the telephone wire. The telephone wire got
detached and fell on the 11 KV Power line and electricity
passed into the telephone wire. At this time, there was a
sound in the TV at PW2’s house and as the deceased
went to separate the telephone wire and cable wire, there
was a short circuit and thereby, the right hand of the
deceased was burnt and he died because of electrocution.
It is further alleged that the said incident took place
because of the negligent act on the part of
Appellant/accused No. 1 and Appellant/accused No. 2.
3. The conviction of the Appellants/Accused rests on
circumstantial evidence and the circumstances
highlighted were as follows:
(1) PW1/doctor’s report suggesting that death
was due to instantaneous cardiac arrest and
paralysis of the brain stem secondary to
shock.
(2) Deposition of PW9,10,16, who were Police
Staff residing in the Delhi police quarters,
3stating that they also touched the telephones
in their respective houses and felt the
presence of electricity and immediately threw
away the telephone instruments.
(3) Evidence of PW1/doctor, who stated that on
the same day he had examined
Appellant/Accused no. 2 for injuries as he
had sustained a fall from the pole and an out­
patient slip was also issued to him.
(4) Evidence of the Prosecution witnesses that
the deceased upon hearing noise from the
television set first switched off the main
electricity switch and then tried to separate
the wires. However, there was still current in
the wires.
(5) Evidence of PW15, who was a higher officer in
the Department of Telephone stating that
Appellant/accused no.1 and Appellant/
accused no. 2 were on duty and working on
that day.
4. The defence taken by the Appellants/accused is
that on the day of the incident, they had not attended
4any telephone wire repair at the place of the incident and
death of the deceased was not due to their carelessness
and negligence. While the Appellants/accused have not
denied the post­mortem report which attributes the
death to instantaneous cardiac arrest and paralysis of
the brain stem secondary to shock, the source of the
shock is implied to be the television set and not the
Telephone connection.
5. After giving our careful consideration to the
respective submissions made by the learned Counsel for
the parties and considering the facts and circumstances
of the case and evidences on record even if we take that
the Appellants/accused were in fact working on the DP
pole on the day of the incident, we find it difficult to
believe that with the alleged 11KV current running
through Telephone wire, the wires did not melt; rather
with the alleged volts of current passing through the
telephone instruments PW9,10,16 were able to throw the
5telephone instruments away upon contact and lived to
tell the tale unharmed. Even assuming that the deceased
and the Prosecution witnesses who received the shock
were wearing slippers at the time of contact causing
resistance in the current, 11KV is still too strong and any
contact with such a high voltage current in all probability
should have left any person who came in contact dead
and his/her body charred. For reference standard
domestic voltage in India is only around 220V. Hitherto,
the evidence by PW9,10 & 16 is hearsay and
circumstantial and not worthy of any credence.
6. Now referring to PW1­Doctor’s evidence; he deposed
that Appellant no. 2 had visited him on the same day of
the incident and had suffered abrasion injuries on his
four fingers of both hands i.e., excluding the thumbs and
abrasions on both thighs. The record shows that the
deceased had also suffered abrasion injury along with
burn injuries. PW1 deposed in Examination­in­chief in
6clear words that “the blood vessels of right thumb finger
and ring finger were burnt and wounds were shrinking.”
In light of these facts the lower court came to the
conclusion that Appellant no. 2 also suffered abrasion
injuries due to electric shock just as the deceased. This
conclusion however does not inspire confidence in our
eyes bearing in mind that if Appellant no.2 had infact
suffered an electric shock coming in contact with 11KV
high tension line and sustained a fall from the pole he
would have suffered burn injuries too such as the
deceased and such a shock along with the fall could
potentially be fatal. However, the record only shows
abrasions on 4 fingers and thighs.
7. We also find difficult to see reason in the
submission that telephone wires were able to carry
current from an 11KV high tension line and did not
immediately melt. It is even more difficult to assimilate
that such current when passed through the television,
7did not blast the television set and set the entire wiring of
the house on fire. Be that as it may, the allegations
against the Appellants are highly technical in nature and
we find that no report or even inspection was conducted
by a technical expert to assess the veracity of the
averments made by the complainants to suggest that it
was due to the alleged acts of the Appellants that the
incident took place.
8. Even the evidence of PW15 is circumstantial in
nature, who stated that as per the job sheet, the
Appellants were working at the Police quarters; however,
there is no eye witness to say conclusively that the
Appellants were infact executing the work at the place
alleged.
9. Here it would be useful to advert to the dictum in
the case of Syad Akbar Vs. State of Karnataka1 in
1 MANU/SC/0275/1979; 1979CriLJ1374
8which this Court proceeded on the basis that doctrine of
res ipsa loquitur stricto sensu would not apply to a
criminal case as its applicability in an action for injury by
negligence is well known. In Syad Akbar (supra), this
Court opined:
“29. Such simplified and pragmatic application
of the notion of res ipsa loquitur, as a part of the
general mode of inferring a fact in issue from
another circumstantial fact is subject to all the
principles, the satisfaction of which is essential
before an accused can be convicted on the basis
of circumstantial evidence alone. These are:
Firstly, all the circumstances, including the
objective circumstances constituting the
accident, from which the inference of guilt is to
be drawn, must be firmly established.
Secondly, those circumstances must be of a
determinative tendency pointing unerringly
towards the guilt of the accused. Thirdly, the
circumstances should make a chain so complete
that they cannot reasonably raise any other
hypothesis save that of the accused's guilt. That
is to say, they should be incompatible with his
innocence, and inferentially exclude all
reasonable doubt about his guilt.”
10. In case of circumstantial evidence, there is a risk of
jumping to conclusions in haste. While evaluating such
9evidence the jury should bear in mind that inference of guilt
should be the only reasonable inference from the facts. In the
present case however, the conviction of the accused persons
seems wholly unjustified against the weight of the evidence
adduced. As far as the onus of proving the ingredients of an
offence is concerned, in the judgment titled as "S.L.Goswami
Vs. State of M.P2" this Court held:­
"5 ..... In our view, the onus of proving all the
ingredients of an offence is always upon the
prosecution and at no stage does it shift to the
accused. It is no part of the prosecution duty to
somehow hook the crook. Even in cases where the
defence of the accused does not appear to be
credible or is palpably false that burden does not
become any less. It is only when this burden is
discharged that it will be for the accused to explain
or controvert the essential elements in the
prosecution case, which would negative it. It is not
however for the accused even at the initial stage to
prove something which has to be eliminated by the
prosecution to establish the ingredients of the
offence with which he is charged, and even if the
onus shifts upon the accused and the accused has
to establish his plea, the standard of proof is not
the same as that which rests upon the
prosecution........................…"
2 1972 CRI.L.J.511(SC)
1011. Bearing in mind the above principles which have been
laid down in the decisions of this Court, we are of the view
that the Courts below were not justified in convicting the
Appellants of negligence under Section 304A read with Section
34 IPC.
12. For bringing home the guilt of the accused, prosecution
has to firstly prove negligence and then establish direct nexus
between negligence of the accused and the death of the victim.
Perusal of the record reveals that out of various witnesses
arrayed by the prosecution, there are no eye witnesses. Any
evidence brought on record is merely circumstantial in nature.
We are constrained to repeat our observation that it sounds
completely preposterous that a telephone wire carried 11KV
current without melting on contact and when such current
passed through the Television set, it did not blast and melt the
wiring of the entire house. It is even more unbelievable that
Appellant no. 2 came in contact with the same voltage and
managed to get away with a few abrasions. The Appellants
11therefore are entitled to be given the benefit of doubt; more so,
when there is no report of a technical expert to corroborate the
prosecution story.
13. Accordingly, impugned judgment of conviction and
sentence of the appellants is set aside. The Appellants are on
bail. They shall be discharged of their bail bonds.
14. As a consequence, the appeal stands allowed.
………………………….CJI.
(N.V. RAMANA)
….…………………………J.
(KRISHNA MURARI)
..………………………….J.
(HIMA KOHLI)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 17, 2022
12