http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 10
PETITIONER:
D.V. SHANMUGHAM & ANR.
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 25/04/1997
BENCH:
G.N. RAY, G.R. PATTANAIK
ACT:
HEADNOTE:
JUDGMENT:
Present
Hon’bleMr. Justice G.N. Ray
Hon’bleMr. Justice G.B. Pattanaik
K. Parasaran, Sr. Adv., V. Krishnamurthy, Adv.with him for
the appellants
Mrs. K. Amreshwari, Sr. Adv.,G. Prabhakar, Adv. with her
for theRespondent
The following Judgment of the Court was delivered:
JU D G ME N T
PATTANAIK, J.
The appealis directed against thejudgment of theHigh
Court of Andhra Pradesh dated15th April, 1994 in Criminal
Appeal no. 695of 1993arisingout of SessionsCase No. 251
of having committed several offences and weretried by the
Additional Sessions Judge, Chittoor at Tirupati and by
judgment dated9th July, 1993all ofthem were convicted
under different sections of the penal Code. All ofthem
except A-2 wereconvicted underSection302/149IPC andwere
sentenced to imprisonment for life. They were also convicted
under Section 148 andsentenced to imprisonment for one
year, under section307/149 theywere sentenced to
imprisonment for five years and underSection324/149were
sentenced to imprisonment forone year, all the sentences
have been directed torun concurrently. A-2 was convicted
under Section 302 for causing murder ofMohan and Sekhar and
was sentenced to imprisonmentfor life, convicted under
Section307 and sentenced or rigorous imprisonment for 5
years and a fine of Rs. 200/- in a default imprisonment for
2 months convicted under Section 324IPC andsentenced to
imprisonment of one year, and324/149IPC andsentenced to
imprisonment for one year, sentences torun concurrently. In
appeal,the High Court by the impugned judgment set aside
the conviction of accused Nos. 3, 4 and5 and acquittedthem
of allthe charges. The HighCourt Also set aside the
Conviction andsentence of accused No. 1 under Sections
148,307/149 and 324/149 IPC. His conviction under Section
302/149 was modifiedto one undersection 302/34 and
sentence of imprisonment for lifewas confirmed. His
conviction under Section 324 for causing hurt to PW-2 was
also maintained. so far as accused no. 2 is concerned thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 10
High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence passed by
the learned Sessions Judge for the offence under Sections
302 and 307 IPC. His conviction under Sections 148 and
324/149and thesentence passedthereunder was set aside and
thus the present appeal.
The prosecution case innutshell is that all the
accused persons belong to village Dasarimatam and the
complainant party belong to the same village. Some incident
had happened between the two groups on 6th May, 1990 in
respectof which a complainant had been lodged by accused
No.1. on account of the Same there was ill feeling between
the two groupsand on the date ofoccurrence on22nd
September, 1990at 8.00P.M. when one Natarajanwas coughing
on account of his feverthe accused No.1 was passing bythat
road on his scooter. He tookthis to be a taunting, and
therefore, brought hisbrother accused No.2 and picked up
quarreland challenged him. Said Natarajan was a relation of
the complainant. Shortly thereafter at 10 P.m. the
complainant PW1 and the deceased - Mohan were returning
from a theatre and whenthey had reached the house of one V.
Murli the fiveaccused persons formed themselves into an
unlawful assembly andattacked the complainant and the
deceased with deadly weapons. While accused No.1 caughthold
of deceased-Mohan accused No.2 stabbed him with a knife on
the abdomen and Mohan fell down wounded. When the
complainant, PW-1 intervened he was also stabbed with a
knife by accused No.2on hisleft hand and accusedNo.1
dealt a blow with a stick onthe right hand. PW-1then
raised an alarm and on hearing the cries his relatives
including Sekhar who isthe other deceased cameout of their
houses and rushed towards Mohan. Thefive accused persons
then also attacked these people andwhile accusedNo.3
caught hold ofSekhar, accused No.2 stabbed him with knife
on hisabdomen and caused fatal injury. These accused
personsmore particularly accused No.4 and 5 hurled stones
which caused injury tothe member of the complainant group.
AccusedNo.1 also stabbed one Ravi Kumar with aknife on his
left elbow, asa result of which said Ravi Kumar was
injured. The injured persons were taken to thehospital for
treatment and Mohan died during the midnight on account of
shock and haemorrhage as a result of the injuries sustained
by him. The sub-Inspector of Police, East PS,on receiving
the information about the incident rushed tothe hospital
and recorded the statement of injured Sekhar at5 a.m. on 23
rd September,1990 and Sekhar ultimately died in the
Hospital on 24th September, 1990 p.m. On the basis of
information given by PW-1 the investigation proceeded and on
completion ofinvestigation charge sheet was submitted
againstthe five accused persons as already stated and on
being committedthey stood their trial.
The prosecution to establish thecharges against the
accused persons examined asmany as 23 witnesses and
exhibited a large number of documents. The defence did not
examine any witnessbut exhibited several documents
including the former statementsof the prosecution witnesses
recorded underSection161 Cr.P.C. for the purpose of
contradicting them during thecourse of their examination
during trial. The learned Sessions Judge on scanning the
evidence on record came to the conclusion that the
prosecution witnesses are reliable and basing upon their
testimony convicted the accused persons and sentencedthem
as already stated. The High Court, however, in the appeal
reappreciated the evidence led by theprosecution andcame
to theconclusion that the prosecution has been able to
establish the charge beyond reasonabledoubt with regard tohttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 10
the role played by accused No.1 and 2for causing injuries
to deceased - Mohan on account of which Mohan ultimately
died. But so far as theinjuries causedon Sekhar though the
prosecution hasbeen able to establish the roledescribed by
accusedNo.2 on that score butthe role ascribed to accused
No.3 and 5 have not been established beyond reasonable
doubt. In otherwords, the HighCourt discardedthe evidence
of the eye-witnesses sofar as they ascribed different parts
played by accused No.3, 4 and 5 in formingthe alleged
unlawful assembly and in assaulting the complainant party
essentially because none of them in their earliest version
to thepolice and implicated these accused persons. Having
come to the aforesaidconclusion theHigh Court heldthat
none of the charges against accused No.3, 4 and 5 can be
said tohave been established by the prosecution and assuch
they were acquitted of the charges. But relying upon the
evidence of the self-same prosecutionwitnesses theHigh
Courtcame tohold that the role ascribed toaccusedNo.1
and 2 in causing injuries on deceasedMohan and Sekhar may
be held to have been established beyond reasonable doubt,
and therefore, convicted A-2 under Section 302 IPC and A-1
under Section 302/34 IPC. TheHigh Court also convicted
these accused 1and 2 who are the appellants in this appeal
under Section 324 IPC of causing hurt to PW-2 andPW-1
respectively and further convictedaccused No.2 under
Section307 IPCfor attempting to commit the murder of PW-7.
It may be stated that the High Court gave a positive finding
on reappreciating the evidencethat accused No.4 and 5have
not Pelted stones as narratedby the prosecution witnesses
an this finding will have vital bearing in deciding the
presentcriminal appeal. It may alsobe stated that the
state has not preferred any appeal against theacquittal of
accusedNo.3, 4 and 5which order of acquittal hasthus
become final.
Mr. K. Parasaran,the learned senior counsel appearing
for the two appellants arguedwith emphasis that no doubt
two persons Mohan andSekhar have died in the course of
occurrence butthe prosecution story as unfolded through a
number of prosecution witnesses who are alleged to be the
eye-witnesses to the occurrence is not the correct version
and theprosecution is guilty of suppressing the genesis and
the origin of the occurrence in asmuchas no explanation has
been offeredfor the injuries sustainedby the two
appellants as well as their father Subramanium,more
particularly, the injuries onthe head of accused No.1 on
accountof which the said accused had multiplestitches and
was required to be removed toNeurological Surgical Centre
and the injuryis grievous in nature, Mr. K. Parasaran
furtherarguedthat the prosecutionis also guilty of
shifting theplace of occurrencein asmuchas though
according tothe prosecution witnesses the incident
including the stabbingof Mohan and Sekhar took place in
front of the house of accused Murli but the blood and blood
stainedstone could be recovered from the Veranda of one Mr.
Reddy which isfar away from the houseof accused Murli and
the prosecution is totally silent as to how such blood and
blood stained stone could be recovered from the Veranda of
Shri Reddy. Mr. K Parasaran also contented that all the
prosecution eye-witnesses are related to each other andthey
have repeated the version in the same mannerand theonly
independent witness PW-10 didnot support the prosecution
case atall andin suchcircumstances when other independent
witnesses wereavailable as narratedby the prosecution
witnesses themselves, non-examination ofsuch other
independent witnesses availableaffectsthe prosecutioncasehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 10
also. Mr. K. Parasaran, lastlyurged that the role ascribed
to accused No.1 and accused No.3 being identical namely
accusedNo.1 caught hold of Mohan whenaccusedNo.2 stabbed
Mohan and accused No.3 caughthold of Sekharwhen accused
No.2 stabbed Sekhar andthe High Court having Re-appreciated
the evidence has already rejected the same so far as the
role ascribedto accused No.3 is concerned, thesame
infirmities m relationto the role ascribed toaccusedNo.1
also vitiates the ultimate conclusionof the High Court in
convicting accused No.1 and the accused No.1 is entitled to
get benefit ofdoubt . Mrs.Amreshwari, learned senior
counselappearing for the state on theother hand contended
that when two courts of facthave already appreciated the
evidence and have recorded their conclusion to the effect
that the prosecution has been able to establish the charges
againstaccusedno. 1 and 2 beyond reasonable doubt it would
not beproper for thecourt to interfere with thesame
conclusion in exerciseof power under Section 136 of the
Constitution more particularlywhen two precious lifehave
been lost. Thelearned counsel also urged that it istrue
that prosecution has not beenable to explain injuries on
the accused persons but the said question has alsobeen
considered by the High Court and yetin viewof the clear
agent evidenceof theprosecution witnesses when theHigh
court has convicted the two accused persons. the sameneed
not beinterfered with by this Court. According to the
learnedcounsel the substratum of thecase isthat accused
No.1 caught hold of Mohan when accused No.2 stabbed Mohan
with the knifeat hisabdomen has been fully established
throughthe several witnesses who themselves havebeen
injuredin the Course of incident,and therefore, the
conviction of the twoappellants maintained by theHigh
Court need not be interfered with by this CourtMrs.
Amreshwari, however, in her ultimate submission statedthat
though accusedNo.1 may be entitled to benefit of doubt by
applying the same reasoning and the same infirmities in the
prosecution witnesses on which accused No.3 hadbeen
acquitted, but so far as accusedNo.2 is concerned,
conviction being basedupon clear and cogentevidence the
same cannot be interfered with.
Coming to the questionof non-explanation of the
injuries on the accused, it appears from Exhibit D-6 ,
Private WoundCertificate the accused appellant No. 1
sustained a lacerated injury of 5x1/2 cmon parietal
eminence-clot formed and wasadmitted in MS III under
Neurosurgery ward but discharged against the medical advice
and the said injury is grievous in nature but mighthave
been caused byblunt object. It is also clearfrom Exhibit
P-10 issued by Dr. S. Koteswara Rao, Casualty Medical
officerof thehospital at Tirupati that the appellantNo.1
was dischargedfrom the hospital on 24.4.1990 at 10 p.m. to
get treatment for Neurosurgery care at higher centre. The
Doctor (PW-15) in his evidence stated :
"A-1 was examined by me on the
requisition sent by East P.S.
Tirupati on 23.9.90. TheA-1 was
sent to the hospital with an escort
of fivepolice constables. I
examined A-1 on 23.3.1990 at 4.45
a.m. As per accident register A-1
told me at that time that he was
assaulted with iron rods, sticks
and chains. I found a lacerated
injury 5X 1/2 cms. On right
parietal eminence. Blood clot werehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 10
found. X-ray was also taken. A-1
was admitted in M.B.3 ward under
Neurosurgeon. Theinjury found on
A-1 was grievous and there are 12
and 13 stitches and after the
receipt of the said injury to A-1,
heshould have profused bleeding."
Exhibit D-11 is the certificategiven by thesaid
Doctor indicating thaton 5.10.1990 the accused - appellant
No.1 attended the hospital for sutureremovaland dressing
and even on that date the woundwas notcompletely healed up
and according to Doctor. It would take another one month for
healing. The aforesaid injury on accused - appellant No.1 on
vital part of the bodyis undoubtedly a grievous injury and
the injured must have profusedbleeding as stated by PW-15.
The accused- appellantNo.2 had sustained the following
injuries as isapparent from ExhibitD-7, which was the
certificate Issued by PW-15:
"1. Multiple abrasions with
swelling of 2x1 cm. Size over
right eye.
2. Rightblack eye present.
3. Swelling of right Molar bone
present."
PW-15 in his evidence alsostated:
"The samepolicebrought A-2 at
4.45 a.m. and examined him on
police requisition. He identified
A-2 Comparing his identification
marks. A-2 also stated before me
that he was assaulted with iron
rods, chains and sticks.I found
the following injuries on A-2 at
that time. I. Swelling of 2x1 cm.
Size on the right molar bones. 2. A
black eyepresent. 3. Swelling in
right molar bone.The injuries are
simple innature. Ex.D.7 is the
certificate issued in favour of A-
2."
The aforesaid injuries on accused - appellant No.2 are
undoubtedly simple in nature. The father of both the accused
- appellants,Subramanium also sustained the following
injuries as isapparent from the certificateExhibit D-8
issued by PW-15:-
"1. An abrasion of 5 cm. In length
over the vault of the skull.
Red in colour.
2. Swelling in left eye brow.
3. Swelling in upper part of leg.
4. Abrasion of 6x3 cm. Over left
calf muscle.
5. Abrasion of 7x4 cm. below left
calf muscle
X-Ray No.1505/14536 of skull AP-
Nobony injury noted.
Hehas been admitted in MSIII ward
under Neurosurgery and discharged
against Medical advice.
The injury is simple in nature,
might have been caused by blunt
object and the age isabout 6
hours.
Station : Tirupati.
Sd/-http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 6 of 10
20.10.90 20-10-90
(Dr. S. KOTESWARA RAO)
CIVILASST. SURGEON
S.V.R.R. HOSPITAL,
TIRUPATI."
PW-15 also in his evidence reiterated the same by
stating:-
"Ifound the following injuries on
him. I have examined himat 4.45
a.m. 1. An abrasion 5cms. In
length over the walt of skull, 2.
Swelling on left eye browpresent.
3.Swelling of upper part of the
left leg.4. Abrasion of 6 x 3 cm.
over the left calf muscle. 5. An
abrasion of 7x4 cms. Below right
cough muscles. He was also
admitted ward No.3 in charge of
Neurosurgeon. The injuries are
simple innature and the age is
about sixhours. 5xD.8 isthe said
certificate."
The aforesaid injuries no doubt are simplein nature as
opined by PW-15.
The High Court came to the conclusion that both the
accused appellants as well as theirfather - Subramanium
received the injuries in course of the occurrence. The
question thatarisesfor consideration iswhether the
prosecution hasofferedany explanationfor such injuries on
the accused- appellants as well as their father and if no
explanation has been offered then forsuch non explanation
has been offered then for suchnon-explanation the
prosecution case in anyway gets affected. The law inthis
regard has been well discussed in a judgment of this Court
in theCase of LAKSHMI SINGH AND OTHERS VS. STATE OF
BIHAR,(1976) 4SCC 394, It has been held bycourt in the
Aforesaid casethat where theprosecution fails to explain
the injuries onthe accused then two results may follow:-
1. that the evidence of the prosecution witness is untrue;
and
2. that the injuriesprobabilise the plea taken by the
appellants.
Ithas also beenheld inthe aforesaid case thatin a
case that in a caseof murder non-explanation of the
injuries sustained by the accused at about the time of the
occurrence is a very important circumstance from which the
court can draw the following inferences:
(1) that the prosecution has
suppressed the genesis and the
origin of the occurrence and
has thus not presented the
true version;
(2) that the witnesses who have
denied the presence of the
injuries on the person of the
accused are lying on a most
material point and therefore
theirevidence is unreliable;
(3) thatin case there is a
defence version whichexplains
the injurieson the person of
the accusedit isrendered
probable so as to throw doubt
on the prosecution case."
Ithas further been heldthat omission on the part ofhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 7 of 10
the prosecutionto explain the injurieson the person of the
accusedassumes much greater importance wherethe evidence
consists of interestedor inimical witnesses. But it is
equallywell settled that the prosecution is not obliged to
explain the injuriessustained by the accused if the
injuries are minor and superficial and wherethe injuries
are not sustained in course of the occurrence. On abare
examination theinjuries found on the two appellants aswell
as their father - Subramanium, we found that though the
injuries on appellant No.2 aswell asfather - Subramanium
were minor in nature and quite superficial and as such the
prosecution was not obliged to explain thoseinjuries but
the injury on appellant No.1 was of such nature that it
cannot go unnoticed bythe witnesses to the occurrencemore
so when the medical evidence is to the effect that there
must be profused bleeding. In respect of such grievous
injury sustained by the appellant No.1 the prosecution is
bound to offersome explanation and if explanation is not
offered then the court is entitled to drawinference as
held by this Court in the caseof LAKSHMI SINGH AND OTHERS
VS. STATE OF BIHAR referred to supra, PW-1 who is admittedly
an eye-witnessto theoccurrence and was at the stop right
from the beginning, inhis evidence stated: "It is nottrue
to saythat in the incident A-1 and A-2 received bleeding
injuries on the head and A-1 sustainedserioushead injury.
It is not true to say that at the time of the incident
Subramanium - the father of A-1 and A-2 was present and he
received injury on heshead and other parrots of his body."
PW-2 who is also an eye-witness to theoccurrence stated "I
have seen the bleeding injuries on the head of A-1 and A-2
but he said injuries were caused due tohurlingof stones by
A-4 and A-5 from the building." It was elicited from his
cross-examination : "police asked me as to how A-1 and A-2
got bleeding injuries and 1 did not state to the police at
that time that A-1 and A-2 received bleeding injuries due to
hurlingof stones by A-4 and A-5". PW-3 who isalso aneye-
witnessto theoccurrence didnot state anything about the
injuries beingsustained by A-1 and A-2 and howsuch
injuries were sustained. PW-6 is also an eye-witness to the
occurrence andwas himself also one ofthe injured. Healso
in hisevidence stated that there were no injuries on A-1
and A-2 at the timeof occurrence and further he states
that he does not knowwhetherA-1 andA-2 andtheir father
were admitted to the hospital by the Police. PW-7 is also an
witnessto theoccurrence andhe stated inhis evidence
that at the time of occurrence there wereno bleeding
injuries on the head of A-1 and A-2. PW-8 is equally a
witnessto the occurrence and he no doubt had stated that he
had marked thebleeding injuries on the head of A-1 and A-2
but did not state asto how accused A-1 and A-2 sustained
those injuries.PW-10 though was examined by the prosecution
but did not support the prosecution and therefore was
permitted bythe court to be cross-examined by the
prosecution. PW-12 is a witness to the assault by accused
No.2 on Sekharas well as the assault on PW-7 by accused
No.1. He in hes evidence hasstated : "at the scene of
occurrence didnot see any bleeding injuries on A-1 and A-
2". Thus, out of theaforesaid 7 eye-witnesses to the
occurrence except PW-2and PW-8 rest did not even state to
have seen the injuries on the head of thetwo accused
appellants. PW-8 though statedto havesen theinjuries but
did not offer explanation as too howthose injurieswere
sustained by the accused appellants. PW-2 though offered an
explanation namely theinjuries are sustained on account of
hurlingof stones by A-4 andA-5 but the High Court onhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 8 of 10
appreciating the evidence came to the positive conclusion
that the prosecution story that A-4 and A-5were hurling
stones is not believable and infact they had not hurled the
stones as alleged. That apart as has been indicated earlier
the PW-2 had not stated before thepolicewhile being
examined underSection161 Cr.P.C. about theexistence of
injuries on the head of the accused personsor as to how
those injurieswere caused. In the aforesaidcircumstance
the conclusionis irresistiblethat the prosecution has not
offered any explanation for the grievousinjuries on
accused-appellant No. 1which the prosecution was obliged to
explainand such omission on the part of the prosecution to
explainthe injuries on accused appellant No.1 assumes
greatersignificance since all the eye-witnesses to the
occurrence are related to the deceased and thuswere
interested in the prosecution. In asmuchas PWs 1 and 2 are
brothers of deceased Sekhar, PW-3 is the mother of deceased
Sekhar,PWs 6 and 7 are brothers of deceased Mohan, PW-8 is
the brother-in-law of Mohan and PW-12is the elder brother
of Mohan. In the aforesaid premises,we findconsiderable
force in the submissionof Mr. Parasaran, the learned senior
counsel for the appellants, that prosecution has not
explained the grievousinjuryon thehead of accused -
appellant No.1 and suchnon-explanationpersuades us todraw
an inference that the prosecution has not presented thetrue
versionat least so far as the role played by accused
appellant No.1and thewitnesses who have beenexamined and
who have ascribed a positive role to the appellant No.1that
he caught holdof Mohan whenappellant No.2 stabbed Mohan
are not true on material point and their evidence thus has
become vulnerable. Even though the accused-appellantNo.2
also sustainedsome injuries as indicated earlier but those
injuries beingsimple and superficialthe prosecution may
not beobligedto offer the explanation to thesame but the
same principlewill have no application whenan injury of
such grievous nature as was sustainedby accused-appellant
No.1 had not been explained by the prosecution witnesses who
are grossly interestedin the prosecution being all related
to one another.
Atthis stage it would beproper for us to; notice the
contention advanced byMrs. Amreshwari, the learned senior
counsel appearing for the State that the prosecution
evidence having been scrutinised by the learned sessions
Judge and the High Court and having been accepted by the two
courts below it wouldnot beproperfor this Court to
interfere withthe convictionin exercise ofpowers under
Article136 ofthe Constitution. We,however, are unable
to persuade ourselves to agreewith the submission wince we
are not appreciating the evidence inthis case but we are
only applying a principle ofcriminal jurisprudence which
casts an obligation on the prosecution toexplain the
injuries on the accused particularly when theinjuries are
of grievous nature and theconsequences of suchnon-
explanation ofthe injury. That apartin appropriate cases
there is no bar on thepowers of this Court even to examine
the evidence if the appreciation of such evidence by the
Courts below on the face of it appears to be erroneous and
such erroneousappreciation causes miscarriage of justice,
However, we are not delving further into the question since
we arenot appreciating the evidencein the case in hand.
The High Courtin ouropinion committed gross error in
comingto the conclusion that non-explanation of the
injuries on A-1 is not material. Thevery approach of the
High Court that since police did not confront the witnesses
about the accused receiving injuries while examiningthemhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 9 of 10
under Section 161 Cr.P.C., no explanation is forthcoming is
erroneous.
Itwould also appear fromthe materials on recordthat
though according to the eye-witnesses the incident occurred
in front of the houseof accused No.3 where both deceased
Mohan and Sekhar werestabbedby accused No.2 and while
taking the injured persons Mohan felldown infront of the
house of Prabhakar asa result of which bloodfell down in
front of the house ofPrabhakar. yetit is difficult to
imagineas to how blood stainswere found fromthe house of
Prabhakar uptothe house of Venkat Reddy as has been stated
by PW-2 and PW-22 oneof theinvestigating officers and
according to the said PW-22 thedistance between Prabhakar’s
house and Venkat Reddy’s house is more than 120feet. Though
Mohan and Sekhar werestabbedin front of the house of
accusedNo.3 as stated by the prosecution witnesses but
blood stains being available upto the house ofPrabhakar is
explained fromthe fact that the injured personswere
carriedupto that placebut beyond thatit is no body’scase
that the injured persons werecarried any further and as
such no explanation is forthcoming as to howblood stains
could be found upto theVerandaof the house ofVenkat Reddy
and then bloodstained stoneswere also recovered from the
Verandaof said Venkat Reddy.This feature also indicates
that the prosecution witnessesare notsure asto where the
occurrence tookplace. It also appearedfrom the evidence of
PW-2 and PW-8 that there were several other people who
witnessed the occurrence and they arenot theresidents of
that locality.If suchindependent witnesses were available
and yet were not examined by the prosecution and only those
personswho are related to the deceased were examinedthen
in such a situation the prosecution case has to be
scrutinised with more care and caution.Further Mr.
Parasaran is right inhis submissionthat the witnesses
ascribed the role of caching hold of Mohan byaccusedNo.1
and role of caching hold of Sekhar byaccusedNo.3 and the
High Court gave the benefit to accused No. 3 since the
witnesses had not narrated the same to thepolicewhen
examination under Section 161 Cr.P.C. took place and
therefore the self sameinfirmities having crept in when the
prosecution witness stated about catching hold of Mohan by
accusedNo.1, the said accused No.1 is entitled to the
benefitof doubt. In fact as stated earlier Mrs. Amreshwari,
the learned senior counsel appearing for the Statealso
fairly stated that possibly it would bedifficult to sustain
the convictionof accused No.1 when the accused No. 3 has
hot benefit andhas been acquitted and no appeal against the
said order of acquittal has been filed by the State. On
accountof such infirmities in that prosecution case as
indicated above and more particularlywhen the prosecution
has failed to offerany explanation for the grievous
injuries sustained by accused No.1 on his headand theHigh
Court has already found that the saidinjury was caused in
course of the incident, we have no hesitationto heldthat
the accused-appellant No. 1 D.V. Shanmugam is entitled to
the benefit ofdoubt and weaccordingly set aside the
conviction and sentenceof the said accused- appellant No. 1
both under Section 302/34 IPCas wellas under Section 324
IPC and directthat heshall be set atlibertyforthwith if
his detention is not required in any other case.
But comingto the case of appellant No.2 the same stand
on a slightly different footing. Mr. Parasaranno doubt had
argued with vehemence that the entire case mustbe discarded
in asmuchas the prosecution has notpresented thetrue
versionand has suppressed the genesis and origin of thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 10 of 10
occurrence which inference is tobe drawn fornon-
explanation of the injuries on the accused person. But as we
found that theinjuries on the accused-appellant No.2 are
all simple andsuperficial in nature and the Prosecution is
not bound to explain such minor and superficial injuries.
That apart where the evidenceis absolutely, clear, cogent
and consistent coming from an independent source that it far
outweighs the effect of the omissionon thepart of the
prosecution toexplainthe injuries onthe accused, insuch
a casea conviction can be based notwithstanding injury is
not being explained as has been heldby thiscourt in the
very case of LAKSHMI SINGH AND OTHER Vs. STATE OF BIHAR on
which Mr. Parasaran, the learned senior counsel placed
reliance upon.So faras the substratum of the prosecution
case of accused - appellant No.2 is concerned it hasbeen
consistently stated by all the eye-witnesses to the
occurrence that accused No. 2stabbedMohan on his abdomen
with the knifeand stabbed Sekhar also on theabdomenwith
the knife. Their evidence also gets corroborated from the
medicalevidence as well as from the post-mortem examination
of thedead bodies of the two deceasedpersons. Even in the
earliest version, in the FIRit had been categorically
stated that accused No.2 D. VaidvelustabbedMohan with a
knife on his abdomen and alsostabbedSekhar with Knife on
his stomach andintestine came out. In view of the aforesaid
clinching evidence so for as the role ascribedto accused -
appellant No. 2, notwithstanding the infirmities indicated
earlierfor which we have given benefit of doubt to accused
- appellant No. 1, itmust be heldthat the prosecution
case as against the appellantNo.2 has been proved beyond
reasonable doubt and therefore the convictionand sentence
againstthe said accused - appellant No.2 as affirmed by the
High Court does not warrant any interference by this court.
In thenet result, theconviction and sentenceof appellant
No.1 -D.V. Shanmugam passed by the High Courtis set aside
and heis acquitted of the charges. He be set at liberty
forthwith unless required in any other criminal case but
conviction andsentence as against appellant No.2 passed by
the bythe High Court stands affirmed and the appeal so far
as A-2is concerned isdismissed. Thisappeal is allowed in
part.