http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 2
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 1037 of 2002
PETITIONER:
STATE OF PUNJAB AND ANR.
RESPONDENT:
RAJESH SYAL
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 04/10/2002
BENCH:
B.N. KIRPAL CJ. & K.G. BALAKRISHNAN & ARIJIT PASAYAT
JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
2002 Supp(3) SCR 124
The following Order of the Court was delivered: Special leave granted.
The respondent is a former Director of Messrs. Golden Forest (India)
Limited. This Company had collected money from the general public for
purchasing the land and had promised that the amount would be returned
after expiry of the maturity period fixed through cheques. When monies were
not repaid and complaints were received by the State, the Vigilance
Department registered FIRs against the respondent as a co-accused in the
case registered against Messrs. Golden Forest (India) Limited. The offences
were under Sections 406, 420, 468, 471, 120B of Indian Penal Code, 1860
(for short "IPC") and Section 7(2) of the Punjab Reforms Act, 1972.
According to the-prosecution, crores of rupees had been obtained by the
said Company from . members of the public. But on the maturity date the
sums were not returned. When proceedings were initiated in different courts
the respondent filed an application under Section 482 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973 (for short "Cr.P.Ci.") in the High Court praying that
the charges framed against him may be dropped. Another application under
Section 482 was filed to the effect that the cases which have been
instituted against him should be tried in one Court. In this connection,
reliance was placed by the respondent on a decision of this Court in the
case of V.K. Sharma v. Union of India, (W.P. (Crl.) No. 256/1999) to which
decision we shall presently revert to. In the said case by the order dated
28th March, 2000; liberty was granted to move the appropriate High Courts
for bringing all the criminal cases pending before different courts within
the territorial jurisdiction of that High Court to one single court or more
than one court consolidated, in a petition filed under Article 32 of the
Constitution of India, 1950 (in short "the Constitution"). But while
passing the said order it was observed that the said order was not to be
treated as a precedent.
The High Court, by treating the order in V.K. Sharma’s case (supra) as a
precedent allowed the petition under Section 482 transferred those cases
which were pending in different courts in the State of Punjab against the
respondent to the Special judicial Magistrate.
It is the aforesaid decision of the High Court transferring the cases
pending before different Courts to the Court of Special judicial
Magistrate, Patiala which is challenged before us.
Learned counsel for the respondent drew our attention to another order
passed by this Court in Writ Petition (Crl.) Nos. 72-75/2000 (P.K. Sharma
v. Union of India) dated 5th May, 2000; whereby it directed that the said
petition be disposed of in terms of the earlier order of 28th March, 2000
in V.K. Sharma’s case.
On a query being raised by this Court, the learned counsel for thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 2
respondent sought to rely on Sections 218 and 220 of Cr.P.C. in an effort
to justify his plea for the consolidation of the cases. Mr. Bali submitted
that because of the proviso to Section 218, even where there are distinct
offences being tried the Magistrate can direct that the same be tried
together. In our opinion, proviso to Section 218 would apply only in such a
case where the distinct offences for which the accused is charged are being
tried before the same Magistrate. In the instant case, offences were being
tried before different Magistrates and proviso to Section 218 cannot give
any single Magistrate the power to order transfer of cases to him from
different Magistrates or Courts. Even Section 220 does not help the
respondent as that applies where any one series of acts are so connected
together as to form the same transaction and where more than one offence is
committed, there can be a joint trial.
In the present case, different people have alleged to have been defrauded
by the respondent and the Company and therefore each offence is a distinct
one and cannot be regarded as constituting a single series of
facts/transaction.
We are not convinced that as presently advised, that there is any provision
which could be of assistance to the respondent in seeking such a transfer.
This is also not a case where the High Court has sought to invoke its
jurisdiction under Section 482 and transfer the cases so as to prevent the
abuse of the process of any Court or to secure ends of justice. The High
Court has mechanically followed the order of this Court in V.K. Sharma’s
case even though the said order states that the order should not be treated
as a precedent.
Before concluding, we would like to observe, with respect, that by
directing that the order which was passed in V.K. Sharma’s case should not
be treated as a precedent implies that the said order is otherwise not in
accordance with law and therefore should not be regarded as a precedent.
This Court has ample jurisdiction to pass orders under Article 142 (1) of
the Constitution which may be necessary for doing complete justice in any
case or matter. But even in exercising this power, it is more than doubtful
that an order can be passed contrary to law. In V.K. Sharma’s case, this
Court did not purport to exercise any jurisdiction under Article 142. The
decision to direct the applicant to file applications to be moved for
consolidations of the cases pending in different Courts for different
offences to be tried in a single’ court was not in accordance with law, and
the said decision of V.K. Sharma and that of P.K. Sharma are over-ruled.
For the aforesaid reasons, this appeal is allowed and the impugned decision
of the High Court is set aside. We make it clear that any observations made
in this order shall not prejudice the respondent in the trial of the cases
against him.