REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1439 OF 2009
BOBY ...APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF KERALA ...RESPONDENT(S)
J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1. This appeal challenges the judgement and order dated 25th
August 2008, passed by the learned Division Bench of the High
Court of Kerala at Ernakulam (hereinafter referred to as “the
High Court”) in Criminal Appeal Nos. 326, 230 and 847 of 2005
thereby dismissing the appeals filed by Shibu @ Shibu Singh
(accused No. 1) and Boby (accused No. 3/appellant herein),
thereby upholding the judgment of conviction and sentence
dated 18th December 2004, passed by the Additional Sessions
1Judge, Fast Track Court–II (Ad­hoc Court), Thrissur
(hereinafter referred to as “the trial court”) in Sessions Case No.
208 of 2003 in respect of the said accused persons. Vide the
same impugned judgment, the High Court, however, allowed
the appeal filed by Biju @ Babi (accused No. 2) and acquitted
him from all the offences charged with.
2. Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeal
are as under:
2.1 On 21st November, 2000, Leela w/o Vishwanathan
(Complainant/PW­1) made a statement before the Police
Station, Anthikkadu, Dist. Thrissur, wherein she alleged that
Shibu @ Shibu Singh (accused No. 1), the younger brother of
her husband, Vishwanathan (deceased), was a convict who was
then undergoing imprisonment as he was involved in many
theft cases wherein stolen articles from the said thefts were
disposed of by her husband.
2.2 It is the case of the complainant that Shibu @ Shibu Singh
(accused No. 1) had escaped from the prison and was
absconding. Due to the fear that Vishwanathan (deceased)
2would disclose to the police about his escape from jail, Shibu @
Shibu Singh (accused No. 1) along with other accused persons,
namely, accused No. 2 to accused No. 7 came in a jeep to the
house of Vishwanathan (deceased) on 20.11.2000 at 08.00 p.m.
The accused persons then held Vishwanathan (deceased) at
knife point, forcefully poured liquor into his mouth and
compelled him to drink till he was left unconscious. When Leela
(Complainant/PW­1) tried to interfere, she sustained injuries
on her palm due to the knife carried by the accused persons
with which they attempted to inflict blows on her. Thereafter,
Leela (Complainant/PW­1) along with her husband were
blindfolded and taken in a jeep. After covering a distance of
about 30 kms., the Complainant/PW­1 was dropped at
Poomala, which was her native place. When she managed to
reach her house with the help of a local named Baiju from the
said village, she informed her brother Babu (P.W.6) about the
aforesaid incident, who attempted to search for Vishwanathan
(deceased) during the said night. Next day, i.e., on 21st
November 2000, Leela (Complainant/PW­1) along with Babu
3(PW­6) lodged her statement (Ext. P­1) at the Police Station
Anthikkadu, Dist. Thrissur. Based on the contents of the
aforesaid complaint, a First Information Report (Ext. P­19) (for
short, “FIR”) came to be registered against the aforementioned
accused persons along with other unknown persons for
offences punishable under Section 395 and 365 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”).
2.3 Boby (accused No. 3/appellant herein) was arrested by the
Police on 25th November 2000. Based on his disclosure
statement (Ext. P­23), the dead body of Vishwanathan, which
was buried at Pattithara on the banks of river Bharathapuzha,
was recovered. Additionally, stolen goods were also recovered
from the house of accused No. 3 and were marked as Ext. P­14.
Shibu @ Shibu Singh (accused No. 1) and Biju @ Babu
(accused No. 2) were arrested on 28th November 2000 from a
lodge at Guruvayoor by the Guruvayoor Police. Subsequently,
they were handed over to the Anthikkadu Police on 2nd
December 2000. Based on the disclosure statement of Shibu @
Shibu Singh (accused No. 1), the spade with which the
4deceased’s burial spot was dug was recovered near the site
where the body was exhumed from, concealed in a plastic bag.
2.4 At the conclusion of investigation, a charge­sheet came to
be filed before the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Court–II,
Thrissur, who committed the case to the Sessions Court,
Thrissur for trial.
2.5 Charges came to be framed by the trial court for the
offences punishable under Sections 395, 364, 365, 380 and
302 read with Section 34 of the IPC.
2.6 All the accused persons pleaded not guilty and claimed to
be tried. The prosecution examined 33 witnesses to bring home
the guilt of the accused persons. The prosecution also placed
on record 14 Material Objects which were marked as M.O. 1 to
M.O. 14. During the cross­examination from the defence side,
Sekharan (DW­1), father of the deceased was examined. The
accused persons were questioned under Section 313 of the
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for short, “the Cr.P.C.”)
wherein they denied the circumstances that appeared against
them in evidence which were put to them. At the conclusion of
5trial, the learned trial court found Shibu @ Shibu Singh
(accused No. 1), Biju @ Babu (accused No. 2) and Boby
(accused No. 3/appellant herein) guilty of the offences charged
with and accordingly sentenced them to undergo life
imprisonment for the offence punishable under Section 302
read with Section 34 IPC. It further directed them to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for different periods for the offences
punishable under Sections 364, 395, and 201 read with Section
34 of the IPC. The sentences were directed to run concurrently.
2.7 Being aggrieved thereby, accused Nos. 1 to 3 preferred their
respective appeals before the High Court. The High Court, by
the impugned judgement, dismissed the appeals preferred by
Shibu @ Shibu Singh (accused No. 1) and Boby (accused No.
3/appellant herein), but was pleased to allow the appeal
preferred by Biju @ Babu (accused No. 2), thereby setting aside
the judgment of conviction and sentence of the trial court
insofar as Biju @ Babu (accused No. 2) was concerned.
3. Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal.
64. We have heard Shri R. Basant, learned Senior Counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellant–Boby and Shri K.N.
Balgopal, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent–State of Kerala.
5. Shri Basant, learned Senior Counsel would submit that
both the trial court and the High Court have erred in convicting
and sentencing the appellant–Boby for the offences punishable
under Sections 395, 365, 364, 201, 380, 302 and 302 read with
Section 34 of the IPC. He submitted that the prosecution has
failed to prove its case against the appellant–Boby beyond
reasonable doubt and that there are glaring lacunae in the case
of the prosecution. It is submitted that even the High Court
found that there were discrepancies in the statements of the
prosecution witnesses who were examined during the trial. It is
further submitted that the High Court also observed the glaring
discrepancies in the statement of the Complainant/PW­1 with
regard to Biju @ Babu (accused No. 2) on the basis of which,
the High Court acquitted the said accused Biju @ Babu
(accused No. 2) of all the charges levelled against him.
76. Shri Basant submitted that a Memorandum under Section
27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter referred to as
“the Evidence Act”) is required in cases of recovery initiated at
the instance of an accused person, based on the statements
made before the Police. It is submitted that, on perusal of
evidence on record in the instant matter, neither such
Memorandum under Section 27 of the Evidence Act was
prepared at the time of the recovery of the body of deceased
Vishwanathan, nor were signatures of independent or panch
witnesses taken at the time of said recovery. It is further
submitted that it was the duty of the Investigating Officer (for
short, ‘IO’) to have prepared the said Memorandum while acting
on the information obtained from Boby (appellant herein) and
that such inaction on part of the IO would vitiate the
prosecution case, at least insofar as proving the recovery of the
dead body of the deceased is concerned.
7. Shri Basant submitted that the trial court solely relied on
the last seen theory and held that the prosecution had proved
the same with regard to the chain of circumstances in this
8case. It is further submitted that conviction of an accused
person cannot be sustained only on the basis of proving the last
seen theory as the same was required to be corroborated with
the statements of the witnesses that are examined during trial
along with other evidence placed on record. While pointing out
the discrepancies in the statements of prosecution witnesses,
which were relied upon by the courts below, it was submitted
that the conviction of the appellant herein could not be
sustained on the said ground alone.
8. Shri Balgopal, on the contrary, submits that the courts
below have concurrently found the accused persons guilty of
the offences charged with. The prosecution has proved the
incriminating circumstances beyond reasonable doubt. It has
also proved the chain of circumstances which leads to no other
conclusion than the guilt of the accused. He relies on the
judgment of this Court in the case of Suresh Chandra Bahri
v. State of Bihar1.
1 1995 Supp. (1) SCC 80
99. Undisputedly, the present case rests entirely on
circumstantial evidence. A three­Judges Bench of this Court in
the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of
Maharashtra2, has laid down the golden principles with regard
to conviction in a case which rests entirely on circumstantial
evidence. We may gainfully refer to the following observations
of this Court in the said case:
“153. A close analysis of this decision would show
that the following conditions must be fulfilled before
a case against an accused can be said to be fully
established:
(1) the circumstances from which the
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should
be fully established.
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that
the circumstances concerned “must or should” and
not “may be” established. There is not only a
grammatical but a legal distinction between “may be
proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was
held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao
Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793 :
1973 SCC (Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl LJ 1783] where the
observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC
(Cri) p. 1047]
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that
the accused must be and not
merely may be guilty before a court can
convict and the mental distance between
‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides
2 (1984) 4 SCC 116
10vague conjectures from sure
conclusions.”
(2) the facts so established should be
consistent only with the hypothesis of the
guilt of the accused, that is to say, they
should not be explainable on any other
hypothesis except that the accused is
guilty,
(3) the circumstances should be of a
conclusive nature and tendency,
(4) they should exclude every possible
hypothesis except the one to be proved,
and
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so
complete as not to leave any reasonable
ground for the conclusion consistent with
the innocence of the accused and must
show that in all human probability the
act must have been done by the
accused.”
10. It can thus clearly be seen that it is necessary for the
prosecution that the circumstances from which the conclusion
of the guilt is to be drawn should be fully established. The
Court holds that it is a primary principle that the accused ‘must
be’ and not merely ‘may be’ guilty before a court can convict the
accused. It has been held that there is not only a grammatical
but a legal distinction between ‘may be proved’ and “must be or
should be proved”. It has been held that the facts so
11established should be consistent only with the guilt of the
accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any
other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty. It has
further been held that the circumstances should be such that
they exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be
proved. It has been held that there must be a chain of evidence
so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the
conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and
must show that in all human probabilities the act must have
been done by the accused.
11. In the light of these guiding principles, we have to examine
the present case.
12. The trial court has relied on the following circumstances:
(i) Last seen together with the deceased;
(ii) Recovery of the stolen material including jewellery from
accused No.3­Boby;
(iii) Recovery of spade from accused No. 1­Shibu @ Shibu
Singh;
(iv) Recovery of the dead body at the instance of accused
No. 3­Boby;
1213. The trial court had convicted accused Nos. 1 to 3 upon
finding that the prosecution had proved the aforesaid
circumstances against them. In appeal, the High Court found
that the prosecution had failed to prove the case against Biju @
Babi (accused No. 2) and accordingly acquitted him.
14. The learned Division Bench of the High Court, though
found that the prosecution had failed to prove the case beyond
reasonable doubt insofar as accused No.2 was concerned, held
that, insofar as accused Nos. 1 and 3 were concerned, the
prosecution had proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.
15. It could thus be seen that the trial court as well as the
High Court found the circumstance of the accused persons
having been last seen in the company of the deceased on the
basis of the evidence of PW­1, as the main incriminating
circumstance. The High Court further found that, insofar as
Boby (accused No.3/appellant herein) was concerned, there was
an additional evidence with regard to the recovery of the dead
body and ornaments. Insofar as Shibu @ Shibu Singh (accused
13No. 1) was concerned, the High Court found that the recovery of
spade which was used to dig the burial site where the dead
body was concealed, was an additional circumstance which
proved the guilt of Shibu @ Shibu Singh (accused No. 1).
16. Insofar as last seen theory is concerned, it will be relevant
to refer to the following observations of this Court in the case of
State of U.P. v. Satish3:
“22. The last­seen theory comes into play where the
time­gap between the point of time when the
accused and the deceased were last seen alive and
when the deceased is found dead is so small that
possibility of any person other than the accused
being the author of the crime becomes impossible. It
would be difficult in some cases to positively
establish that the deceased was last seen with the
accused when there is a long gap and possibility of
other persons coming in between exists. In the
absence of any other positive evidence to conclude
that the accused and the deceased were last seen
together, it would be hazardous to come to a
conclusion of guilt in those cases. In this case there
is positive evidence that the deceased and the
accused were seen together by witnesses PWs 3 and
5, in addition to the evidence of PW 2.”
17. It could thus clearly be seen that the last­seen theory
comes into play where the time­gap between the point of time
3 (2005) 3 SCC 114
14when the accused and the deceased were last seen alive and
when the deceased is found dead is so small that possibility of
any person other than the accused being the author of the
crime becomes impossible. If the gap between the time of last
seen and the deceased found dead is long, then the possibility
of other person coming in between cannot be ruled out.
18. In the present case, according to the complainant/PW­1,
the deceased was taken away by the accused persons on the
night of 20th November 2000 at 08.00 p.m. Though, it is the
contention of the appellant that he was taken into illegal
custody on 21st November, 2000 and his arrest was shown on
25th November, 2000, we do not find it necessary to go into that
aspect of the matter. A perusal of the evidence of the IO would
reveal that, on 25th November, 2000, on the basis of secret
information that Boby (accused No.3/appellant herein) was
standing at Manaloor Kadavu, he proceeded to that place and
arrested him at 02.00 p.m. He stated that, on the basis of his
confession, various articles were seized from his house. He
further stated that thereafter on the same day, the accused led
15them towards the place in Bharathapuzha where the deceased
was buried. He stated that, after seeing the loose soil, the scene
was guarded as it was an odd time. He further stated that, on
26th November 2000, as led by accused No. 3, they reached the
place and the Tahasildar, Ottapalam prepared the inquest
report.
19. It can thus clearly be seen that firstly, there is a gap of at
least five days from the date on which, according to PW­1, the
deceased was taken away by the accused persons and the dead
body was recovered. However, the crucial question would be as
to whether it can be held that the prosecution had established
beyond reasonable doubt that the recovery of dead body was at
the instance of Boby (accused No. 3/appellant herein). Only in
the event the prosecution establishes that the recovery of the
body was at the instance of Boby (accused No. 3/appellant
herein), the relevancy of the gap of five days would come.
20. As early as 1946, the Privy Council had considered the
provisions of Section 27 of the Evidence Act in the case of
16Pulukuri Kotayya and Others v. King­Emperor4. It will be
relevant to refer to the following observations of the Privy
Council in the said case:
“The second question, which involves the
construction of s. 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, will
now be considered. That section and the two
preceding sections, with which it must be read, are
in these terms. [His Lordship read ss. 25, 26 and 27
of the Evidence Act and continued : ] Section 27,
which is not artistically worded, provides an
exception to the prohibition imposed by the
preceding section, and enables certain statements
made by a person in police custody to be proved.
The condition necessary to bring the section into
operation is that the discovery of a fact in
consequence of information received from a person
accused of any offence in the custody of a police
officer must be deposed to, and there upon so much
of the information as relates distinctly to the fact
thereby discovered may be proved. The section
seems to be based on the view that if a fact is
actually discovered in consequence of information
given, some guarantee is afforded thereby that the
information was true, and accordingly can be safely
allowed to be given in evidence; but clearly the
extent of the information admissible must depend
on the exact nature of the fact discovered to which
such information is required to relate. Normally the
section is brought into operation when a person in
police custody produces from some place of
concealment some object, such as a dead body, a
weapon or ornaments, said to be connected with the
crime of which the informant is accused. Mr. Megaw
for the Crown, has argued that in such a case the
4 1946 SCC OnLine PC 47
17“fact discovered” is the physical object produced,
and that any information which relates distinctly to
that object can be proved. On this view information
given by a person that the body produced is that of
a person murdered by him, that the weapon
produced is the one used by him in the commission
of a murder, or that the ornaments produced were
stolen in a dacoity, would all be admissible. If this
be the effect of s. 27, little substance would remain
in the ban imposed by the two preceding sections
on confessions made to the police, or by persons in
police custody. That ban was presumably inspired
by the fear of the legislature that a person under
police influence might be induced to confess by the
exercise of undue pressure. But if all that is
required to lift the ban be the inclusion in the
confession of information relating to an object
subsequently produced, it seems reasonable to
suppose that the persuasive powers of the police
will prove equal to the occasion, and that in practice
the ban will lose its effect. On normal principles of
construction their Lordships think that the
proviso to s. 26, added by s. 27, should not be
held to nullify the substance of the section. In
their Lordships' view it is fallacious to treat the
“fact discovered” within the section as
equivalent to the object produced; the fact
discovered embraces the place from which the
object is produced and the knowledge of the
accused as to this, and the information given
must relate distinctly to this fact. Information
as to past user, or the past history, of the
object produced is not related to its discovery in
the setting in which it is discovered. Information
supplied by a person in custody that “I will produce
a knife concealed in the roof of my house” does not
lead to the discovery of a knife; knives were
18discovered many years ago. It leads to the discovery
of the fact that a knife is concealed in the house of
the informant to his knowledge, and if the knife is
proved to have been used in the commission of the
offence, the fact discovered is very relevant. But if to
the statement the words be added “with which I
stabbed A.”, these words are inadmissible since they
do not relate to the discovery of the knife in the
house of the informant.”
[Emphasis supplied]
21. It could thus be seen that Section 27 of the Evidence Act
requires that the fact discovered embraces the place from which
the object is produced and the knowledge of the accused as to
this, and the information given must relate distinctly to the said
fact. The information as to past user, or the past history, of the
object produced is not related to its discovery. The said view
has been consistently followed by this Court in a catena of
cases.
22. This Court, in the case of Chandran v. The State of
Tamil Nadu5, had an occasion to consider the evidence of
recovery of incriminating articles in the absence of record of the
statement of accused No. 1. In the said case also, no statement
of accused No. 1 was recorded under Section 27 of the Evidence
5 (1978) 4 SCC 90
19Act leading to the recovery of jewels. The Court found that the
Sessions Judge as well as the High Court had erred in holding
that the jewels were recovered at the instance of accused No. 1
therein in pursuance to the confessional statement (Ex. P­27)
recorded before PW­34 therein. It will be relevant to refer to the
following observations of this Court in the said case:
“36. ……Thus the fact remains that no confessional
statement of A­1 causing the recovery of these
jewels was proved under Section 27, Evidence
Act…..”
23. It is thus clear that this Court refused to rely on the
recovery of jewels since no confessional statement of the
accused was proved under Section 27 of the Evidence Act.
24. It will also be relevant to refer to the following observations
of this Court in the case of State of Karnataka v. David
Rozario and Another6:
“5. ……This information which is otherwise
admissible becomes inadmissible under Section 27
if the information did not come from a person in the
custody of a police officer or did come from a person
not in the custody of a police officer. The statement
which is admissible under Section 27 is the one
which is the information leading to discovery. Thus,
6 (2002) 7 SCC 728
20what is admissible being the information, the same
has to be proved and not the opinion formed on it
by the police officer. In other words, the exact
information given by the accused while in custody
which led to recovery of the articles has to be
proved. It is, therefore, necessary for the benefit
of both the accused and the prosecution that
information given should be recorded and
proved and if not so recorded, the exact
information must be adduced through evidence.
The basic idea embedded in Section 27 of the
Evidence Act is the doctrine of confirmation by
subsequent events. The doctrine is founded on
the principle that if any fact is discovered as a
search made on the strength of any information
obtained from a prisoner, such a discovery is a
guarantee that the information supplied by the
prisoner is true. The information might be
confessional or non­inculpatory in nature but if
it results in discovery of a fact, it becomes a
reliable information. It is now well settled that
recovery of an object is not discovery of a fact
envisaged in the section. Decision of the Privy
Council in Pulukuri Kottaya v. Emperor [AIR 1947
PC 67 : 48 Cri LJ 533 : 74 IA 65] is the most­quoted
authority for supporting the interpretation that the
“fact discovered” envisaged in the section embraces
the place from which the object was produced, the
knowledge of the accused as to it, but the
information given must relate distinctly to that
effect. (See State of Maharashtra v. Damu [(2000) 6
SCC 269 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 1088 : 2000 Cri LJ
2301] .…..”
[Emphasis supplied]
2125. A three­Judges Bench of this Court recently in the case of
Subramanya v. State of Karnataka7, has observed thus:
“82. Keeping in mind the aforesaid evidence, we
proceed to consider whether the prosecution has
been able to prove and establish the discoveries in
accordance with law. Section 27 of the Evidence Act
reads thus:
“27. How much of information received from
accused may be proved.—
Provided that, when any fact is deposed
to as discovered in consequence of
information received from a person
accused of any offence, in the custody of a
police officer, so much of such information,
whether it amounts to a confession or not,
as relates distinctly to the fact thereby
discovered, may be proved.”
83. The first and the basic infirmity in the evidence
of all the aforesaid prosecution witnesses is that
none of them have deposed the exact statement said
to have been made by the appellant herein which
ultimately led to the discovery of a fact relevant
under Section 27 of the Evidence Act.
84. If, it is say of the investigating officer that the
accused appellant while in custody on his own free
will and volition made a statement that he would
lead to the place where he had hidden the weapon
of offence, the site of burial of the dead body,
clothes etc., then the first thing that the
investigating officer should have done was to call for
two independent witnesses at the police station
itself. Once the two independent witnesses would
7 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1400
22arrive at the police station thereafter in their
presence the accused should be asked to make an
appropriate statement as he may desire in regard to
pointing out the place where he is said to have
hidden the weapon of offence etc. When the accused
while in custody makes such statement before the
two independent witnesses (panch­witnesses) the
exact statement or rather the exact words uttered
by the accused should be incorporated in the first
part of the panchnama that the investigating officer
may draw in accordance with law. This first part of
the panchnama for the purpose of Section 27 of the
Evidence Act is always drawn at the police station
in the presence of the independent witnesses so as
to lend credence that a particular statement was
made by the accused expressing his willingness on
his own free will and volition to point out the place
where the weapon of offence or any other article
used in the commission of the offence had been
hidden. Once the first part of the panchnama is
completed thereafter the police party along with the
accused and the two independent witnesses (panch­
witnesses) would proceed to the particular place as
may be led by the accused. If from that particular
place anything like the weapon of offence or blood
stained clothes or any other article is discovered
then that part of the entire process would form the
second part of the panchnama. This is how the law
expects the investigating officer to draw the
discovery panchnama as contemplated under
Section 27 of the Evidence Act. If we read the entire
oral evidence of the investigating officer then it is
clear that the same is deficient in all the aforesaid
relevant aspects of the matter.”
2326. This Court has elaborately considered as to how the law
expects the IO to draw the discovery panchnama as
contemplated under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. In the
present case, leave aside the recovery panchnama being in
accordance with the aforesaid requirement, there is no
statement of Boby (accused No. 3/appellant herein) recorded
under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. We are, therefore, of the
considered view that the prosecution has failed to prove the
circumstance that the dead body of the deceased was recovered
at the instance of Boby (accused No. 3/appellant herein).
27. Another circumstance on which the High Court relied was
that the recovery of ornaments was at the instance of Boby
(accused No. 3/appellant herein). We find that both the trial
court and the High Court have patently erred in relying on such
recovery. The trial court found that there was enough material
to show that the alleged recovery memo was a fabricated
document and the alleged recovery as per Ext. P­14 is farce.
However, the trial court still relied on the said recovery to
convict the accused. In our view, the finding of the trial court
24in this regard is totally perverse which has been confirmed by
the High Court.
28. Insofar as Shibu @ Shibu Singh (accused No. 1) is
concerned, the additional circumstance sought to be relied on
by the trial court and the High Court is the alleged recovery of
the spade. It is to be noted that the spade was also recovered
from the same place from where the dead body of the deceased
was alleged to have been recovered at the instance of Boby
(accused No. 3/appellant herein). The trial court again held
that the place from where the spade was recovered was already
known from the disclosure statement of Boby (accused No.
3/appellant herein); however, it still held the recovery of the
said spade to be admissible in evidence. It is thus clear that
the said recovery was from a place which was already known
and not exclusively within the knowledge of Shibu @ Shibu
Singh (accused No. 1). We find that the trial court has again
committed perversity in arriving at such a finding.
29. It is thus clear that the only circumstance that now
remains is the circumstance of the accused last seen in the
25company of the deceased on the basis of the evidence of PW­1.
In that view of the matter, we find that, solely on the basis of
last seen theory, the conviction could not have been recorded.
The prosecution has utterly failed to prove that the recovery of
the dead body of the deceased was at the instance of Boby
(accused No. 3/appellant herein). The recovery of the articles
from the house of Boby (accused No. 3/appellant herein), even
according to the trial court, is farce and fabricated. The
recovery of the spade at the instance of Shibu @ Shibu Singh
(accused No. 1) is from a place which, even according to the
trial court, was also known on account of the disclosure
statement made by Boby (accused No. 3/appellant herein).
30. In that view of the matter, we find that the prosecution has
utterly failed to prove the chain of incriminating circumstances
which leads to no other conclusion than the guilt of the
accused.
31. Insofar as the reliance placed by Shri Balgopal, learned
Senior Counsel on the case of Suresh Chandra Bahri (supra)
26is concerned, it is totally misplaced inasmuch as in paragraph
40, this Court has observed thus:
“40. …….Before we discuss the merits or demerits
of the aforesaid submissions we would like to state
that the law relating to conviction based on
circumstantial evidence is well settled and it hardly
requires a detailed discussion on this aspect.
Suffice to say that in a case of murder in which the
evidence that is available is only circumstantial in
nature then in that event the facts and
circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is
required to be drawn by the prosecution must be
fully established beyond all reasonable doubt and
the facts and circumstances so established should
not only be consistent with the guilt of the accused
but they also must entirely be incompatible with the
innocence of the accused and must exclude every
reasonable hypothesis consistent with his
innocence.”
32. It will further be relevant to refer to the following
observations of this Court in the said case:
“71. ……The provisions of Section 27 of the
Evidence Act are based on the view that if a fact is
actually discovered in consequence of information
given, some guarantee is afforded thereby that the
information was true and consequently the said
information can safely be allowed to be given in
evidence because if such an information is further
fortified and confirmed by the discovery of articles
or the instrument of crime and which leads to the
27belief that the information about the confession
made as to the articles of crime cannot be false…..”
33. A perusal of paragraph 71 of the said judgment would
reveal that the Court has reiterated that the two essential
requirements for the application of Section 27 of the Evidence
Act are that (1) the person giving information must be an
accused of any offence and (2) he must also be in police
custody. The Court held that the provisions of Section 27 of the
Evidence Act are based on the view that if a fact is actually
discovered in consequence of information given, some guarantee
is afforded thereby that the information was true and
consequently the said information can safely be allowed to be
given in evidence.
34. In the facts of the said case, the Court found that there
was, in fact, a confessional statement of the disclosure made by
the appellant Gurbachan Singh which was confirmed by the
recovery of the incriminating articles. As such, the Court
believed the disclosure statement and the evidence led in that
28behalf. As already stated hereinabove, in the present case,
there is no confessional statement of Boby (accused
No.3/appellant herein) recorded with regard to recovery of the
dead body of the deceased.
35. In the result, the appeal is allowed.
36. The judgment dated 18th December 2004 passed by the
trial Court, thereby convicting the appellant under Sections
395, 365, 364, 201, 380, 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC
and the impugned judgment dated 25th August 2008, passed by
the High Court affirming the same are set aside. The appellant
is acquitted of all the charges charged with. The bail bonds of
the accused shall stand discharged.
37. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…..….......................J.
[B.R. GAVAI]
……....................…..J.
[M.M. SUNDRESH]
NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 12, 2023.
291
ITEM NO.102/1 COURT NO.8 SECTION II-B
S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal No(s). 1439/2009
BOBY Appellant(s)
VERSUS
STATE OF KERALA Respondent(s)
Date : 12-01-2023 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B.R. GAVAI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.M. SUNDRESH
For Appellant(s) Mr. R. Basant, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Abdulla Naseeh V.T., Adv.
Meena K. Poulose, Adv.
Mr. Akshay, Adv.
Mr. Ashok Basoya, Adv.
Ms. Shruti Jose, Adv.
Mr. P. S. Sudheer, AOR
For Respondent(s) Mr. K.N. Balgopal, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Harshad V. Hameed, AOR
Mr. Dileep Poolakkot, Adv.
Ms. Ashly Harshad, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
O R D E R
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed
reportable judgment. Pending application(s), if any,
shall stand disposed of.
The concluding paragraph of the judgment reads
as under :
“The judgment dated 18th December 2004 passed
by the trial Court, thereby convicting the
appellant under Sections 395, 365, 364, 201,2
380, 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC and
the impugned judgment dated 25th August 2008,
passed by the High Court affirming the same
are set aside. The appellant is acquitted of
all the charges charged with. The bail bonds
of the accused shall stand discharged.”
(Geeta Ahuja) (Anju Kapoor)
Assistant Registrar-cum-PS Court Master
(signed reportable judgment containing the reasons is placed
on the file)
# signed order dated 12.1.2023 along with ROP has already been uploaded and
sent to the concerned Branch.3
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1439 OF 2009
BOBY APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF KERALA RESPONDENT(S)
O R D E R
For the reasons to be recorded separately, the
appeal is allowed.
The judgment and order dated 18.12.2004 of the trial
Court of conviction and sentence of the appellant
punishable under Sections 395, 365, 364, 201, 380, 302
read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and the
judgment and order dated 25.08.2008 of the High Court
affirming the same are set aside.
The appellant is acquitted of all the charges
charged with. The bail bonds of the accused shall stand
discharged.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed
of.
............... J.
( B.R. GAVAI )
............... J.
( M.M. SUNDRESH )
NEW DELHI
12th JANUARY, 20234
ITEM NO.102 COURT NO.8 SECTION II-B
S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal No(s). 1439/2009
BOBY Appellant(s)
VERSUS
STATE OF KERALA Respondent(s)
Date : 12-01-2023 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B.R. GAVAI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.M. SUNDRESH
For Appellant(s) Mr. R. Basant, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Abdulla Naseeh V.T., Adv.
Meena K. Poulose, Adv.
Mr. Akshay, Adv.
Mr. Ashok Basoya, Adv.
Ms. Shruti Jose, Adv.
Mr. P. S. Sudheer, AOR
For Respondent(s) Mr. K.N. Balgopal, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Harshad V. Hameed, AOR
Mr. Dileep Poolakkot, Adv.
Ms. Ashly Harshad, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
O R D E R
For the reasons to be recorded separately, the
appeal is allowed.
The judgment and order dated 18.12.2004 of the trial
Court of conviction and sentence of the appellant
punishable under Sections 395, 365, 364, 201, 380, 302
read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and the
judgment and order dated 25.08.2008 of the High Court
affirming the same are set aside.
The appellant is acquitted of all the charges5
charged with. The bail bonds of the accused shall stand
discharged.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.
(Geeta Ahuja) (Anju Kapoor)
Assistant Registrar-cum-PS Court Master
(Signed Order is placed on the file)