2023 INSC 655
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 639 OF 2023
VERNON …APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR. ...RESPONDENT(S)
WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.640 OF 2023
J U D G M E N T
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
The appellants before us assail two judgments of the High
Court of Judicature at Bombay rejecting, in substance, their
prayers for bail. Both the applications were filed on 27th October
2018 after the Special Judge, Pune under the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (“1967 Act”) had dismissed
their bail plea. The decisions of the High Court were delivered
on the same date i.e. 15th October 2019.
1 | Pa ge2. We shall deal with both the appeals in this judgment as
the detention of the appellants was on the basis of the same
First Information Report (“FIR”) and the chargesheet also
contains the same Sections in respect of which offences are
alleged to have been committed by them. These are Sections
121, 121A, 124A, 153A, 505(1)(b), 117, 120B read with Section
34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“1860 Code”) and Sections
13, 16, 17, 18, 18B, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of the 1967 Act.
Wherever there are distinguishing features vis-à-vis the
individual appellants in relation to the nature of evidence
against them relied on by the Investigating Agency, we shall
refer to them separately. In the subject-case, initially
investigation was conducted by the regular law enforcement
agency, being the State police. The Central Government, in
exercise of their power under Section 6(5) read with Section 8 of
the National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 directed the
National Investigation Agency (“NIA”) to take up investigation of
the case by an order passed on 24th January 2020. The case
was re-registered at the NIA Police Station, Mumbai as RC
No.01/2020/NIA/MUM. Before us, the appeals have been
contested by Mr. Nataraj, learned Additional Solicitor General,
appearing for the NIA.
2 | Pa ge3. The proceedings against the appellants have their origin in
an FIR, bearing CR No.4/2018 dated 8th January 2018
registered with Vishrambaug Police Station, Pune,
Maharashtra. The informant is one Tushar Ramesh Damgude.
The incident which prompted filing of the FIR was in relation to
a programme at Shaniwar Wada, Pune held on 31st December
2017. The organisers for this event- Elgar Parishad, were
activists of Kabir Kala Manch, a cultural organisation. There
were various events in connection with the said programme,
which according to the prosecution, were provocative in nature
and had the effect of creating enmity between caste groups
leading to violence and loss of life, as also state wide agitation.
There were books kept at the venue, which, according to the
maker of the FIR were also provocative. There were incidents of
violence, arson, and stone pelting near Bhima-Koregaon and six
members of Kabir Kala Manch and other associates were named
as accused in the FIR. The appellants did not feature in the
FIR. The scope of the investigation was subsequently expanded,
as we find in the judgment giving rise to Criminal Appeal
No.639 of 2023 on 17th April 2018 the Pune Police conducted
searches at the residences of eight individuals, i.e. (1) Rona
Wilson of Delhi, (2) Surendra Gadling of Nagpur, (3) Sudhir
3 | Pa geDhawale of Mumbai, (4) Harshali Potdar of Mumbai, (5) Sagar
Gorkhe (also referred to as Sagar Gorakhe by the prosecution)
of Pune, (6) Deepak Dhengale of Pune, (7) Ramesh Gaichor of
Pune and (8) Jyoti Jagtap of Pune. The residences of Shoma
Sen and Mahesh Sitaram Raut, who have also been implicated
in the same case, were searched on 6th June 2018. It has been
argued by the NIA that during the searches, electronic devices
and documents apart from other materials were recovered and
the seized articles were sent to Forensic Science Laboratory
(“FSL”) for analysis. Cloned copies thereof, according to the
prosecution, revealed incriminating materials. The appellants’
names did not also figure in the initial chargesheet dated 15th
November 2018, which implicated ten individuals as accused.
Among them were Sudhir Dhawale, Surendra Gadling, Shoma
Sen, Mahesh Raut and Rona Wilson, who were in detention at
that point of time. Rest five accused persons were absconding at
that point of time. We are informed by Mr. Nataraj that one of
the absconding accused, Milind Teltumbde, has since passed
away.
4. Searches were conducted at the residences/workplaces of
the appellants and they were arrested on the same day, i.e. on
4 | Pa ge28th August 2018. They were initially put under house arrest
and subsequently sent to judicial custody. Case of the NIA is
that various letters and other materials recovered from the
arrested co-accused persons including Surendra Gadling and
Rona Wilson showed appellants’ involvement with the
Communist Party of India (Maoist). This organisation has been
placed in the First Schedule to the 1967 Act as a terrorist
organisation by a notification dated 22nd June 2009 issued in
terms of Section 2(m) of the 1967 Act. Prosecution’s case is that
the appellants played an active role in recruitment of and
training for cadres of the said organisation and Arun Ferreira
(whom we shall refer to henceforth as AF), being the appellant
in Criminal Appeal No.640 of 2023 also had role in managing
finances of that organisation. The other accused persons who
were detained in the third phase were P. Varavara Rao and
Sudha Bharadwaj. Among them, we are apprised by the
learned senior counsel for the appellants, Ms. Rebecca John
appearing for Vernon Gonsalves (VG in short), being the
appellant in Criminal Appeal No.639 of 2023 and Mr. R. Basant
(representing AF) that, P. Varavara Rao has been enlarged on
bail by an order of this Court passed on 10th August 2022.
Sudha Bharadwaj is on “default bail” granted by the Bombay
5 | Pa geHigh Court on 1st September 2021. Petition for special leave to
appeal against that order was rejected by a three-Judge Bench
of this Court on 7th December 2021. Gautam Navlakha, as per
information made available before this Court, is under house
arrest. Another supplementary chargesheet has been submitted
on 21st February 2019 by the State police implicating the
appellants, along with other co-accused persons for commission
of aforesaid offences under the 1967 Act and the 1860 Code. On
9th October 2020, NIA had filed a further supplementary
chargesheet against, inter-alia, Dr. Anand Teltumbde, Gautam
Navlakha, Hany Babu, Sagar Gorkhe, Ramesh Gaichor, Jyoti
Jagtap, Stan Swami (since deceased) and Milind Teltumbde
(since deceased) broadly under the same provisions of the 1860
Code and the 1967 Act. Barring deceased Milind Teltumbde, all
these individuals had been arrested. Among them, Dr. Anand
Teltumbde has been released on bail by the Bombay High Court
and the judgment to that effect was delivered on 18th November
2022. The petition for special leave to appeal against that
decision has been dismissed by a coordinate Bench of this
Court on 25th November 2022. VG, it transpires from his
pleadings, is a writer, columnist and has been vocal on issues of
human rights, prison rights and reform of the criminal justice
6 | Pa gesystem. AF has described himself as a practising Advocate of
the Bombay High Court as also a cartoonist and a human
rights activist.
5. After the arrest of the appellants, a writ petition was filed
before this Court [Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 260/2018-
Romila Thapar and Ors. -vs- Union of India and Ors.]. One of
the prayers in this petition was for direction of immediate
release of all activists arrested in connection with the Bhima
Koregaon violence. Direction was also sought for staying any
arrest until the matter was fully investigated and decided by
this Court. That writ petition was dismissed on 28th September
2018 (by a 2:1 majority). The majority view was that it was not
a case of arrest because of expression of mere dissenting views
or difference in political ideology of the named accused, but
concerning their links with the members of the banned
organisation. At that stage, the Court did not go into an
exercise of evaluating the materials brought before it. This
finding or observation, however, cannot aid the prosecution in a
regular application for bail, the appeals in respect of which we
are adjudicating. The Court deciding on specific plea of the
appellants for bail is required to independently apply its mind
7 | Pa geand examine the materials placed before it for determining the
question of granting bail to the individual applicants.
6. As the charges against the appellants include commission
of offences under different Sections of the 1967 Act, including
those coming within Chapters IV and VI thereof, the restriction
on grant of bail as contained in Section 43D (5) of the said Act
would apply in their cases. We shall also refer to the ratio of the
judgment of a three-Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
Union of India -vs- K.A. Najeeb [(2021) 3 SCC 713] while
examining the appellants’ cases in the backdrop of the aforesaid
provision. In this judgment, it has been held that such
statutory restrictions, per se, do not oust the jurisdiction of the
Constitutional Courts to grant bail on grounds of violation of
Part III of the Constitution of India and it would be within the
jurisdiction of the Constitutional Courts, i.e., this Court and
the High Courts to relax the rigours of such provisions, where
there is no likelihood of trial being completed within a
reasonable time and the period of incarceration a detenue has
already undergone, covers a substantial part of the prescribed
sentences for the offences with which the latter has been
charged. This ratio has been relied upon by the learned counsel
8 | Pa gefor the appellants. Other authorities cited on this point are
Thwaha Fasal -vs- Union of India [2021 SCC OnLine SC 1000]
and Angela Harish Sontakke -vs- State of Maharashtra
[(2021) 3 SCC 723]. On general proposition of law on the aspect
of grant of bail due to delay in trial, the case of Sagar Tatyaram
Gorkhe and Another -vs- State of Maharashtra [(2021) 3 SCC
725] has been relied upon. In course of hearing, we were
apprised by the appellants’ counsel that charges against the
appellants are yet to be framed.
7. We have referred to the case of Dr. Anand Teltumbde, who
was added as an accused in relation to the same case on 23rd
August 2018 and has subsequently enlarged on bail. His name,
according to the prosecution, had surfaced from digital devices
and other articles seized by the police, in the expanded phase of
investigation. Dr. Anand Teltumbde had surrendered on 14th
April 2020 after his plea for pre-arrest bail was rejected.
Subsequently, however, he has been released on bail.
8. Arguments have been advanced before us on the question
as to whether mere membership of a banned organisation
constitutes an offence or not. On behalf of the appellants’
reliance was placed on the prevailing view that the same would
9 | Pa genot be sufficient to constitute an offence under the 1967 Act or
the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987
(which statute also has similar provisions) unless it is
accompanied with some overt offending act. A three Judge-
Bench of this Court in the case of Arup Bhuyan -vs- State of
Assam and Another [2023 SCC OnLine SC 338] has held that
if a person, even after an organisation is declared as an
unlawful association, continues to be a member thereof, would
attract penalty under Section 10 of the 1967 Act.
9. Barring Section 13, all the offences with which the
appellants have been charged with under the 1967 Act fall
within Chapters IV and VI of the said statute. This is apart from
the offences under the 1860 Code. Hence, there is a duty of the
Court to form an opinion on perusal of the case diary or the
report made under Section 173 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (“1973 Code”) that there are reasonable
grounds for believing that the accusations against such persons
are prima facie true while considering the prayer for bail, to
reject prayers for bail of the appellants. The manner in which
the Court shall form such opinion has been laid down by this
Court in the case of National Investigation Agency -vs-
10 | Pa geZahoor Ahmad Shah Watali [(2019) 5 SCC 1]. It has been held
in this judgment:-
"23. By virtue of the proviso to sub-section (5), it is the
duty of the Court to be satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the accusation
against the accused is prima facie true or otherwise.
Our attention was invited to the decisions of this Court,
which has had an occasion to deal with similar special
provisions in TADA and MCOCA. The principle
underlying those decisions may have some bearing
while considering the prayer for bail in relation to the
offences under the 1967 Act as well. Notably, under the
special enactments such as TADA, MCOCA and the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985,
the Court is required to record its opinion that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is
“not guilty” of the alleged offence. There is a degree of
difference between the satisfaction to be recorded by
the Court that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that the accused is “not guilty” of such offence
and the satisfaction to be recorded for the purposes of
the 1967 Act that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that the accusation against such person is
“prima facie” true. By its very nature, the expression
“prima facie true” would mean that the
materials/evidence collated by the investigating agency
in reference to the accusation against the accused
concerned in the first information report, must prevail
until contradicted and overcome or disproved by other
evidence, and on the face of it, shows the complicity of
such accused in the commission of the stated offence. It
must be good and sufficient on its face to establish a
given fact or the chain of facts constituting the stated
offence, unless rebutted or contradicted. In one sense,
the degree of satisfaction is lighter when the Court has
to opine that the accusation is “prima facie true”, as
compared to the opinion of the accused “not guilty” of
such offence as required under the other special
enactments. In any case, the degree of satisfaction to
be recorded by the Court for opining that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the accusation
against the accused is prima facie true, is lighter than
the degree of satisfaction to be recorded for considering
a discharge application or framing of charges in relation
to offences under the 1967 Act. Nevertheless, we may
take guidance from the exposition in Ranjitsing
Brahmajeetsing Sharma v. State of Maharashtra,
11 | Pa ge[(2005) 5 SCC 294 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 1057], wherein a
three-Judge Bench of this Court was called upon to
consider the scope of power of the Court to grant bail.
In paras 36 to 38, the Court observed thus : (SCC pp.
316-17)
“36. Does this statute require that before a
person is released on bail, the court, albeit
prima facie, must come to the conclusion that
he is not guilty of such offence? Is it necessary
for the court to record such a finding? Would
there be any machinery available to the court
to ascertain that once the accused is enlarged
on bail, he would not commit any offence
whatsoever?
37. Such findings are required to be recorded
only for the purpose of arriving at an objective
finding on the basis of materials on record
only for grant of bail and for no other purpose.
38. We are furthermore of the opinion that the
restrictions on the power of the court to grant
bail should not be pushed too far. If the court,
having regard to the materials brought on
record, is satisfied that in all probability he
may not be ultimately convicted, an order
granting bail may be passed. The satisfaction
of the court as regards his likelihood of not
committing an offence while on bail must be
construed to mean an offence under the Act
and not any offence whatsoever be it a minor
or major offence. … What would further be
necessary on the part of the court is to see the
culpability of the accused and his involvement
in the commission of an organised crime either
directly or indirectly. The court at the time of
considering the application for grant of bail
shall consider the question from the angle as
to whether he was possessed of the requisite
mens rea.”
And again in paras 44 to 48, the Court observed : (SCC
pp. 318-20)
“44. The wording of Section 21(4), in our
opinion, does not lead to the conclusion that
the court must arrive at a positive finding that
the applicant for bail has not committed an
offence under the Act. If such a construction is
placed, the court intending to grant bail must
arrive at a finding that the applicant has not
committed such an offence. In such an event, it
will be impossible for the prosecution to obtain
12 | Pa gea judgment of conviction of the applicant. Such
cannot be the intention of the legislature.
Section 21(4) of MCOCA, therefore, must be
construed reasonably. It must be so construed
that the court is able to maintain a delicate
balance between a judgment of acquittal and
conviction and an order granting bail much
before commencement of trial. Similarly, the
court will be required to record a finding as to
the possibility of his committing a crime after
grant of bail. However, such an offence in
futuro must be an offence under the Act and
not any other offence. Since it is difficult to
predict the future conduct of an accused, the
court must necessarily consider this aspect of
the matter having regard to the antecedents of
the accused, his propensities and the nature
and manner in which he is alleged to have
committed the offence.
45. It is, furthermore, trite that for the purpose
of considering an application for grant of bail,
although detailed reasons are not necessary to
be assigned, the order granting bail must
demonstrate application of mind at least in
serious cases as to why the applicant has
been granted or denied the privilege of bail.
46. The duty of the court at this stage is not to
weigh the evidence meticulously but to arrive
at a finding on the basis of broad probabilities.
However, while dealing with a special statute
like MCOCA having regard to the provisions
contained in sub-section (4) of Section 21 of the
Act, the court may have to probe into the
matter deeper so as to enable it to arrive at a
finding that the materials collected against the
accused during the investigation may not
justify a judgment of conviction. The findings
recorded by the court while granting or
refusing bail undoubtedly would be tentative
in nature, which may not have any bearing on
the merit of the case and the trial court would,
thus, be free to decide the case on the basis of
evidence adduced at the trial, without in any
manner being prejudiced thereby.
47. In Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh
Ranjan [(2004) 7 SCC 528 : 2004 SCC (Cri)
1977] this Court observed : (SCC pp. 537-38,
para 18)
13 | Pa ge‘18. We agree that a conclusive finding in
regard to the points urged by both the
sides is not expected of the court
considering a bail application. Still one
should not forget, as observed by this
Court in Puran v. Rambilas [(2001) 6 SCC
338: 2001 SCC (Cri) 1124] : (SCC p. 344,
para 8)
“8. …Giving reasons is different
from discussing merits or demerits.
At the stage of granting bail a
detailed examination of evidence
and elaborate documentation of the
merits of the case has not to be
undertaken. … That did not mean
that whilst granting bail some
reasons for prima facie concluding
why bail was being granted did not
have to be indicated.”
We respectfully agree with the above
dictum of this Court. We also feel that such
expression of prima facie reasons for
granting bail is a requirement of law in
cases where such orders on bail
application are appealable, more so
because of the fact that the appellate court
has every right to know the basis for
granting the bail. Therefore, we are not in
agreement with the argument addressed
by the learned counsel for the accused that
the High Court was not expected even to
indicate a prima facie finding on all points
urged before it while granting bail, more so
in the background of the facts of this case
where on facts it is established that a large
number of witnesses who were examined
after the respondent was enlarged on bail
had turned hostile and there are
complaints made to the court as to the
threats administered by the respondent or
his supporters to witnesses in the case. In
such circumstances, the court was duty-
bound to apply its mind to the allegations
put forth by the investigating agency and
ought to have given at least a prima facie
finding in regard to these allegations
because they go to the very root of the right
of the accused to seek bail. The non-
consideration of these vital facts as to the
14 | Pa geallegations of threat or inducement made
to the witnesses by the respondent during
the period he was on bail has vitiated the
conclusions arrived at by the High Court
while granting bail to the respondent. The
other ground apart from the ground of
incarceration which appealed to the High
Court to grant bail was the fact that a large
number of witnesses are yet to be
examined and there is no likelihood of the
trial coming to an end in the near future.
As stated hereinabove, this ground on the
facts of this case is also not sufficient
either individually or coupled with the
period of incarceration to release the
respondent on bail because of the serious
allegations of tampering with the
witnesses made against the respondent.’
48. In Jayendra Saraswathi
Swamigal v. State of T.N. (2005) 2 SCC 13 :
2005 SCC (Cri) 481] this Court observed
[(SCC pp. 21-22, para 16)]
‘16. … The considerations which
normally weigh with the court in
granting bail in non-bailable offences
have been explained by this Court
in State v. Jagjit Singh [(1962) 3 SCR
622 : AIR 1962 SC 253 : (1962) 1 Cri
LJ 215] and Gurcharan Singh v. State
(UT of Delhi) [(1978) 1 SCC 118 : 1978
SCC (Cri) 41] and basically they are —
the nature and seriousness of the
offence; the character of the evidence;
circumstances which are peculiar to the
accused; a reasonable possibility of the
presence of the accused not being
secured at the trial; reasonable
apprehension of witnesses being
tampered with; the larger interest of the
public or the State and other similar
factors which may be relevant in the
facts and circumstances of the case.’”
10. We shall first deal with the argument of the appellants
that the accusations against the appellants under the Sections
15 | Pa gewhich fall within Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act cannot
lead to a prima facie satisfaction of the Court that such
accusations are true and the available evidences at this stage
do not fit the ingredients of these restrictive provisions. The
nature of the accusations to invoke the bail-restricting clause
has been stated in the supplementary chargesheet in which the
appellants were implicated. The counter-affidavits also contain
printouts/copies of several letters and documents. In the case
of VG, the Agency has relied upon the statement of a protected
witness who has disclosed that he had met VG in the year
2002. Referring to a time-length between 2002 and 2007, he
has stated that during that period, both VG and AF were
members of the Maharashtra State Committee of the said party.
It is also stated by the protected witness that, in 2002 VG
wanted to resign from the party but his resignation was not
accepted.
11. Before embarking on this exercise, we reproduce below the
following provisions of the 1967 Act, the application of which we
shall have to examine in respect of the appellants: -
“2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires,-
xxxxxxxxxxx
(k) “terrorist act” has the meaning assigned to
it in section 15, and the expressions
16 | Pa ge“terrorism” and “terrorist” shall be construed
accordingly;
xxxxxxxxxxx
(m) “terrorist organisation” means an
organisation listed in the [First Schedule] or
an organisation operating under the same
name as an organisation so listed;
13. Punishment for unlawful activities.—(1) Whoever—
(a) takes part in or commits, or
(b) advocates, abets, advises or incites the
commission of, any unlawful activity, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(2) Whoever, in any way, assists any unlawful activity of
any association declared unlawful under section 3, after the
notification by which it has been so declared has become
effective under sub-section (3) of that section, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any treaty,
agreement or convention entered into between the
Government of India and the Government of any other
country or to any negotiations therefor carried on by any
person authorised in this behalf by the Government of India.
15. Terrorist act.— (1) Whoever does any act with intent to
threaten or likely to threaten the unity, integrity, security,
economic security or sovereignty of India or with intent to
strike terror or likely to strike terror in the people or any
section of the people in India or in any foreign country,—
(a) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive
substances or inflammable substances or firearms or
other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases or
other chemicals or by any other substances (whether
biological radioactive, nuclear or otherwise) of a
hazardous nature or by any other means of whatever
nature to cause or likely to cause—
(i) death of, or injuries to, any person or persons; or
(ii) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property;
or
(iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential
to the life of the community in India or in any
foreign country; or
17 | Pa ge(iiia) damage to, the monetary stability of
India by way of production or smuggling or
circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian
paper currency, coin or of any other material;
or
(iv) damage or destruction of any property in India
or in a foreign country used or intended to be used
for the defence of India or in connection with any
other purposes of the Government of India, any
State Government or any of their agencies; or
(b) overawes by means of criminal force or the show
of criminal force or attempts to do so or causes death
of any public functionary or attempts to cause death
of any public functionary; or
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and
threatens to kill or injure such person or does any
other act in order to compel the Government of India,
any State Government or the Government of a
foreign country or [an international or inter-
governmental organisation or any other person to do
or abstain from doing any act; or] commits a terrorist
act.
[Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section,—
(a) “public functionary” means the constitutional
authorities or any other functionary notified in the
Official Gazette by the Central Government as public
functionary;
(b) “high quality counterfeit Indian currency” means the
counterfeit currency as may be declared after
examination by an authorised or notified forensic
authority that such currency imitates or compromises
with the key security features as specified in the Third
Schedule.]
(2) The terrorist act includes an act which constitutes an
offence within the scope of, and as defined in any of the
treaties specified in the Second Schedule.
16. Punishment for terrorist act.—(1) Whoever commits
a terrorist act shall,—
(a) if such act has resulted in the death of any
person, be punishable with death or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine;
(b) in any other case, be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than five years but which may extend to
18 | Pa geimprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine.
17. Punishment for raising funds for terrorist act.—
Whoever, in India or in a foreign country, directly or
indirectly, raises or provides funds or collects funds,
whether from a legitimate or illegitimate source, from any
person or persons or attempts to provide to, or raises or
collects funds for any person or persons, knowing that such
funds are likely to be used, in full or in part by such person
or persons or by a terrorist organisation or by a terrorist
gang or by an individual terrorist to commit a terrorist act,
notwithstanding whether such funds were actually used or
not for commission of such act, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and
shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—
(a) participating, organising or directing in any of the acts
stated therein shall constitute an offence;
(b) raising funds shall include raising or collecting or
providing funds through production or smuggling or
circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian currency; and (c)
raising or collecting or providing funds, in any manner for
the benefit of, or, to an individual terrorist, terrorist gang or
terrorist organisation for the purpose not specifically covered
under section 15 shall also be construed as an offence.
18. Punishment for conspiracy, etc.—Whoever conspires or
attempts to commit, or advocates, abets, advises or incites,
directs or knowingly facilitates the commission of, a terrorist
act or any act preparatory to the commission of a terrorist
act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than five years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
18A. Punishment for organising of terrorist camps.--
Whoever organises or causes to be organised any camp or
camps for imparting training in terrorism shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
18B. Punishment for recruiting of any person or persons for
terrorist act.—Whoever recruits or causes to be recruited any
person or persons for commission of a terrorist act shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
19 | Pa ge20. Punishment for being member of terrorist gang or
organisation.—Any person who is a member of a terrorist
gang or a terrorist organisation, which is involved in terrorist
act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable
to fine.
38. Offence relating to membership of a terrorist
organisation.—(1) A person, who associates himself, or
professes to be associated, with a terrorist organisation with
intention to further its activities, commits an offence relating
to membership of a terrorist organisation:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply where the
person charged is able to prove—
(a) that the organisation was not declared as a terrorist
organisation at the time when he became a member or
began to profess to be a member; and
(b) that he has not taken part in the activities of the
organisation at any time during its inclusion in the First
Schedule as a terrorist organisation.
(2) A person, who commits the offence relating to
membership of a terrorist organisation under sub-section (1),
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding ten years, or with fine, or with both.
39. Offence relating to support given to a terrorist
organisation.—(1) A person commits the offence relating to
support given to a terrorist organisation,—
(a) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist
organisation,—
(i) invites support for the terrorist organization, and
(ii) the support is not or is not restricted to provide money or
other property within the meaning of section 40; or
(b) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist
organisation, arranges, manages or assists in arranging or
managing a meeting which he knows is—
(i) to support the terrorist organization, or
(ii) to further the activity of the terrorist organization, or
(iii) to be addressed by a person who associates or professes
to be associated with the terrorist organisation; or
(c) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist
organisation, addresses a meeting for the purpose of
encouraging support for the terrorist organisation or to
further its activity.
20 | Pa ge(2) A person, who commits the offence relating to support
given to a terrorist organisation under sub-section (1) shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding
ten years, or with fine, or with both.
40. Offence of raising fund for a terrorist
organisation.—(1) A person commits the offence of raising
fund for a terrorist organisation, who, with intention to
further the activity of a terrorist organisation,—
(a) invites another person to provide money or other
property, and intends that it should be used, or has
reasonable cause to suspect that it might be used, for the
purposes of terrorism; or
(b) receives money or other property, and intends that it
should be used, or has reasonable cause to suspect that it
might be used, for the purposes of terrorism; or
(c) provides money or other property, and knows, or has
reasonable cause to suspect, that it would or might be used
for the purposes of terrorism.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, a reference to provide money or other
property includes—
(a) of its being given, lent or otherwise made
available, whether or not for consideration; or
(b) raising, collecting or providing funds through
production or smuggling or circulation of high
quality counterfeit Indian currency.
(2) A person, who commits the offence of raising
fund for a terrorist organisation under sub-section
(1), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term not exceeding fourteen years, or with fine, or
with both.
43D. Modified application of certain provisions of the
Code.--(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code
or any other law, every offence punishable under this Act
shall be deemed to be a cognizable offence within the
meaning of clause (c) of section 2 of the Code, and
"cognizable case" as defined in that clause shall be
construed accordingly.
(2) Section 167 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case
involving an offence punishable under this Act subject to the
modification that in sub-section (2),--
(a) the references to "fifteen days", "ninety days" and "sixty
days", wherever they occur, shall be construed as references
to "thirty days", "ninety days" and "ninety days"
respectively; and
21 | Pa ge(b) after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:--
"Provided further that if it is not possible to complete the
investigation within the said period of ninety days, the Court
may if it is satisfied with the report of the Public Prosecutor
indicating the progress of the investigation and the specific
reasons for the detention of the accused beyond the said
period of ninety days, extend the said period up to one
hundred and eighty days:
Provided also that if the police officer making the
investigation under this Act, requests, for the purposes of
investigation, for police custody from judicial custody of any
person in judicial custody, he shall file an affidavit stating
the reasons for doing so and shall also explain the delay, if
any, for requesting such police custody.
(3) Section 268 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case
involving an offence punishable under this Act subject to the
modification that--
(a) the reference in sub-section (1) thereof
(i) to "the State Government" shall be construed as a
reference to "the Central Government or the State
Government.";
(ii) to "order of the State Government" shall be construed as
a reference to "order of the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be"; and
(b) the reference in sub-section (2) thereof, to 'the State
Government" shall be construed as a reference to "the
Central Government or the State Government, as the case
may be".
(4) Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation
to any case involving the arrest of any person accused of
having committed an offence punishable under this Act.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no
person accused of an offence punishable under Chapters IV
and VI of this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or
on his own bond unless the Public Prosecutor has been
given an opportunity of being heard on the application for
such release:
Provided that such accused person shall not be released on
bail or on his own bond if the Court, on a perusal of the case
diary or the report made under section 173 of the Code is of
the opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing
that the accusation against such person is prima facie true.
22 | Pa ge(6) The restrictions on granting of bail specified in sub-
section (5) is in addition to the restrictions under the Code or
any other law for the time being in force on granting of bail.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
sections (5) and (6), no bail shall be granted to a person
accused of an offence punishable under this Act, if he is not
an Indian citizen and has entered the country
unauthorisedly or illegally except in very exceptional
circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing.”
12. Allegations against these two appellants appear, inter-alia,
from paragraphs 17.5, 17.9, 17.10, 17.11, 17.15 17.18 and
17.19 of the first supplementary chargesheet. These paragraphs
from the chargesheet dated 21st February 2019 are quoted
below:-
“17.5 During the investigation of this crime it
emerged that the activity of the accused in this
was not limited to only creating antagonism
between two sections but they were also doing
other destructive acts against the country.
Accused Sudhir Dhawale, Rona Wilson,
Surendra Gadling, Mahesh Raut and Shoma sen
had done unlawful and terrorist acts in
accordance with a pre-planned plot by and on
behalf of the banned organization C.P.I (Maoist) ,
a large country wide conspiracy to overthrow
through force of violence the constitutionality
established democracy and administrative
system in the country. It has also emerged that
the present crime is also one part of this
conspiracy.
Since the participation of accused No.1
Varavara Rao, No.2 Vernon Gonsalves, No.3 Arun
Ferreira, No.4 Sudha Bharadwaj and other
accused in the said conspiracy of the banned
organization C.P.I (Maoist) became clear, their
residences and those places from where evidence
could possibly be obtained were searched on
28/08/2018.
17.9 It has emerged that accused No.2 Vernon
Gonsalves No.3 Arun Ferreira and No.4 Sudha
23 | Pa geBharadwaj along with other accused have
recruited members for the banned terrorist
organization. They are also active members of
the said banned organization and have fulfilled
the objectives of the banned organization by
doing propaganda and dissemination through
the medium of frontal organization with the
ideology of the organization.
17.10 Accused No.2 Vernon Gonsalves has been
convicted and sentenced by the Hon’ble Court of
Session , Nagpur in C.R.No.10/2007 offence u/s
10,13,16,17,18,20,23,40(2) Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 25(1-B) Arms Act, 6,9(b)
Explosives Act, 4(b), 5 Explosive Substances act
120-B, 121-A IPC of A.T.S. Kala Chowky Police
Station , Mumbai. He has accordingly served the
sentence. Accused Vernon Gonsalves Unlawful
Activities as member of banned organization
have been going on continuously.
17.11 During investigation of the said crime it
has emerged that I.A.P.L (Indian Association of
People’s Lawyers) is a frontal organization of the
banned organization C.P.I (Maoist) and is
working according to the organization’s direction
and orders and with its economic backing to
fulfill the objectives of the banned organization.
Accused no.3 Arun Ferreira , No.4 Sudha
Bharadwaj and Surendra Gadling are members
of the said frontal organization. They along with
other accused have made conscious attempts to
spread this frontal organization. By doing
various unlawful activities through the medium
of this frontal organization they have endangered
the stability of the country.
17.15. Thus accused nos. 01 to 04 and other
accused are members of the banned terrorist
organization CPI (Maoist). All work related to this
organization is done by these accused is an
underground manner. It has emerged from the
evidence obtained that frontal organization
which supposedly promote democratic rights and
civil liberties, such as Indian Association of
People’s Lawyers (I.A.P.L) , Anuradha Ghandy
Memorial Committee (A.G.M.C), Kabir Kala
Manch, Persecuted Prisoners Solidarity
Committee (P.P.S.C) are set up or similar
organizations are infiltrated in as systematic
manner and under their cover the work related to
24 | Pa gethe terrorist organization C.P.I (Maoist) is being
accomplished is an extremely secret manner.
17.18. During the Investigation it has emerged
that the accused No.01 to 04 in this offence and
other accused have worked as part of a pre-
planned conspiracy devised by the banned
organisation C.P.I. (Maoist), a large, countrywide
plot and conspiracy to overthrow by force of
violence the democratic administrative system
established under the country’s constitution. It
emerged that the organisation C.P.I. (Maoist) and
the members of the organisation in this offence
have hatched the conspiracy of this offence.
17.19. Accused no.1 in the said offence Varavara
Rao, Accused Rona Wilson and Surendra
Gadling along with the Polit Bureau and Central
Committee and other underground members of
the banned terrorist organisation C.P.I.(Maoist)
hatched a criminal conspiracy and obtained the
participation of the accused no.02 Vernon
Gonsalves, accused no.3 Arun Ferreira and
accused no.04 Sudha Bharadwaj in the said
conspiracy and got them to participate as active
members of the banned C.P.I. (Maoist)
organisation banned by the Government of India
for the continuation of Unlawful Activity, for
exchange of messages, for the implementation of
the goals and policies of the said unlawful
organisation by planning and convening sittings
along with them as also to help their unlawful
activities. In same manner it has emerged that
hard disks, pendrives, memory cards, mobiles,
etc. seized during the house search of accused
no.1 Varavara Rao, Surendra Gadling and Rona
Wilson contained correspondence, papers,
photographs, etc. related to the banned
CPI(Maoist) organisation as also that they
attempted in different ways to implement the
goals, policies and objectives of the said
organisation. It also emerged that they attempted
in different ways to do acts against the country
to overthrow the democratic and lawful
administrative system through the medium of
frontal organisations established on behalf of the
banned organisation in urban areas.”
(quoted verbatim from paperbook)
25 | Pa ge13. In the first statement, the protected witness who appears
to have had been associated with Maoist movement claims to
have met VG in the year 2002 as we have already indicated. He
has spoken of a timeline between 2002 to 2007. According to
him, at that time VG and AF were members of the Maharashtra
State Committee, presumably of CPI (Maoist) organisation. This
statement was recorded on 27th January 2019 by an Assistant
Commissioner of Pune Police. The protected witness has made
another statement on 27th July 2020 before the police in which
he has referred to participation of AF in a seminar of
Revolutionary Democratic Front in Hyderabad in the year 2012
and VG in September 2017 by an organisation referred to as
“Virasam”. These were also broadly repeated in his statement
before a Magistrate recorded under Section 164 of the 1973
Code on 28th July 2020. The prosecution has also relied on
statements made by one Kumarsai, who appears to have been
associated with the same organisation. Such statements
appear to have been made on 2nd November 2018 and 23rd
December 2018. He has stated that he had personally never
seen VG but according to him, VG was doing the work of uniting
intellectuals. About AF, he is alleged to have said that he was
“intruding” in student organisations and creating cadre, who
26 | Pa gewere being sent to forests. He also claims to have met AF in the
2003-2007 phase. The third witness, whose statements have
also been relied upon by the prosecution agency is one
Sudarshan Satyadeo Ramteke. He has referred to another Arun
(Arun Bhelke) in his statement, whom he had met while working
for an organisation in Chandrapur. He also declared himself as
a party associate in his statement, and claims to have had been
introduced to AF by another person. He has alleged that AF,
Milind Teltumbde and Anil Nagpure had asked him to work with
the said organisation.
14. VG has been earlier implicated in 19 cases for alleged
crimes under the 1967 Act, the Arms Act 1959, and the
Explosives Act 1884. But it has been submitted before us on his
behalf that he has been acquitted in 17 out of these 19 cases. In
respect of another case, his discharge application is pending. He
was convicted in Case No.257/11 by the Sessions Judge,
Nagpur under Section 25 (1B) of the Arms Act 1959, Sections
10(a)(i) and 13(1)(b) of the 1967 Act. There were charges against
him also under Section 9(B) of the Explosives Act 1884,
Sections 4(b) and 5 of the Explosives Substances Act, 1908 and
Sections 10 (a)(ii)(iii)(iv), 10(b), 16, 17, 18, 20 and 23 of the
1967 Act and Sections 120B and 121A of 1860 Code. It has
27 | Pa gebeen emphasised by learned counsel for VG that his conviction
is under appeal before the High Court, and the offences for
which he has been convicted do not fall within offences
incorporated in Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act. The other
case is Sessions Case No.261/10 pending before the Sessions
Court at Surat.
15. The prosecution has referred to some letters alleged to
have been recovered from the computers or other devices of the
co-accused persons in which activities of the two appellants
have been referred to. We shall deal with these communications
in the subsequent paragraphs of this judgment. Under
ordinary circumstances in a petition for bail, we must point out,
this exercise of analysis of evidence would not have been
necessary. But in view of the restrictive provisions of Section
43D of the 1967 Act, some element of evidence-analysis
becomes inevitable.
16. The High Court in dealing with both these appeals had
opined that the Investigating Agency had materials which prima
facie showed that the applicants were part of a larger
conspiracy attracting the offences contained in Sections 121A,
117 and 120B of the 1860 Code as well as Section 18 of the
1967 Act against them. The High Court had invoked the
28 | Pa geallegations of recruiting cadres for the banned organisation, to
import the provisions of Section 18B of the 1967 Act. It further
invoked Section 20 of the same statute on the ground that the
appellants had been active members of the banned
organisation. In the same way, the view of the High Court was
that Sections 38 and 39 of the 1967 Act were attracted against
the appellants. The High Court found that there were sufficient
materials in the chargesheet against the appellants and there
were reasonable grounds to believe that the accusation of
commission of offences punishable under Chapters IV and VI of
the 1967 Act was prima facie true in relation to both the
appellants. The High Court, however, did not take into
consideration, the factor of the appellants’ continued detention.
But the judgment of the High Court was delivered on 15th
October 2019, when the appellants were in detention for a
period little over one year.
17. The NIA has also referred to a set of letters which are
alleged to have been recovered from electronic devices of the co-
accused persons in course of searches. The other set of
documents on which the NIA has placed reliance, are
literatures, pamphlets etc. some of which are meant to have
been recovered from the residences of the appellants
29 | Pa gethemselves. So far as the aforesaid letters are concerned, copies
thereof have been annexed to the courter-affidavits of the NIA
filed in connection with both the appeals. We shall refer to
them in this judgment in the way they have been described
numerically as annexures in NIA’s counter-affidavit in the
appeal of AF. The first document is an undated letter addressed
to Surendra, from an unnamed sender, marked as Annexure “R-
6”. This letter is claimed to have been recovered from the
computer of one of the co-accused and refers to Radical Student
Union initiative by AF and VG. This letter requests the
addressee to ask Arun to manage finances for legal defence of
one Murgan. There is further reference to two other individuals
who apparently have been inspired by the struggles of AF and
VG.
18. The second document is a letter dated 18th April 2017,
marked as Annexure “R-10”, addressed to one “Comrade
Prakash” and is claimed to have been written by “R”.
Prosecution claims “R” is Rona Wilson. Only reference to the
two appellants in this document is that they, and others were
equally concerned about the “two-line struggle” that was slowly
taking shape on the urban front. The source of this letter has
not been disclosed in the counter-affidavit. From the content of
30 | Pa gethis letter, the Agency wants to establish that the appellants
were senior leaders of the banned organisation.
19. The third document is a letter dated 25th September
2017, marked as Annexure “R-12”, written by “Comrade
Prakash”, which is claimed to have been recovered from the
computer of Surendra Gadling and addressee thereof is
“Comrade Surendra”. Here also there is appreciation of
activities of ‘Vernon’ and ‘Arun’ in motivating research scholars
to get them involved in the revolutionary movement. About VG,
it is recorded that one “Comrade G” has been asked to arrange
APT to meet with Vernon.
20. As regards AF, his name appears in an undated letter,
marked as Annexure “R-4”, addressed to Surendra by Darsu,
which refers to organisation of a joint meeting by the addressee
and Arun in Hyderabad. The next letter is purported to have
been written to Prakash by Surendra on 5th November 2017 and
is marked as Annexure “R-5”. It refers to establishing Indian
Association of People’s Lawyer (“IAPL”) in Kerala for which
discussion was held with Arun. According to the Agency, IAPL –
a lawyer’s body is a frontal organisation of the banned
organisation. This communication records a proposed visit to
Kerala on International Human Rights Day by AF and the
31 | Pa geauthor thereof. This is followed by a further communication
from Prakash to Surendra dated 16th July 2017 (“R-7”). This
letter records a proposed visit of Arun to Chennai in connection
with release of a detained party member as also raising of funds
for the legal defence of detained persons. Here also, there is
appreciation of AF and VG’s work. The next letter at Annexure
“R-22” is claimed to have been written by Sudha Bharadwaj to
Prakash and this letter relates to a seminar titled “Udta
Loktantra against the UAPA Act” in which Arun was to
participate. Lastly there is a letter at Annexure “R-14” written
by one Anantwa to Comrade Monibai which relates to the
celebration of 50th Anniversary of the Great Proletarian
revolution and Naxalites organisation in Mumbai (Bombay) and
records that the party had sent revolutionary greetings to
Comrades of various associations, including the appellant,
Arun.
21. There is also a reference to an account statement alleged
by the prosecution to have been recovered from the laptop of
Rona Wilson (Annexure “R-3”). We reproduce below this
statement in the same form as it has been represented in the
said Annexure:-
“Surendra=R=2.5L from Milind
32 | Pa geShoma & amp; Sudhir = R and D = 1L from Surendra
Amit B = R = 1.5 for CPDR canvasing
And T = R = 90T from Surendra (Through Milind)
Myself = R = 1.8L from Com Manoj
Arun = R = 2L from Com Darsu
VV = R = 5L from Com G.”
22. Apart from these letters and statements, various
literatures, books etc. have been referred to by the prosecution
which they claim to have recovered from the residences of AF
and VG. These mainly involve writings on extreme left-wing
ideology including its application to India. Similar materials are
alleged to have been recovered from other accused persons as
well. Recovery of different electronic communication devices
like Mobile Phones, Tablets, Pen Drives and ancillary items is
alleged to have been made. From these devices themselves,
however, no evidence has been cited before us which would
implicate AF and VG in terrorist acts and the other offences
barring the letters on which emphasis has been laid by the
agency. We have already referred to the letters which the law
enforcement agency alleges to have recovered from the devices
of other accused persons in which there are references to AF
and VG. Call Detail Records have also been referred to for
establishing location of the accused and also their inter-
association.
33 | Pa ge23. In pursuance of the judgment of this Court in the case of
Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (supra) the documents relied upon
by the prosecution at this stage ought to prevail until overcome
or disproved by other evidences. In the case of Dr. Anand
Teltumbde -vs- National Investigation Agency and Another
[2022 SCC OnLine Bom 5174] allegations were similar in nature
against the petitioner therein. He was charged with all the
Sections of the 1967 Act as has been done in the cases of AF
and VG except Section 40. The Bombay High Court by a
judgment delivered on 18th November 2022 had enlarged him on
bail. The NIA’s petition for special leave to appeal [SLP(Crl) No.
11345/2022] against that judgment was dismissed by a
Coordinate Bench of this Court on 25th November 2022.
24. As it would be evident from the analysis of the evidence
cited by the NIA, the acts allegedly committed by the appellants
can be categorised under three heads. The first is their
association with a terrorist organisation which the prosecution
claims from the letters and witness statements, particulars of
which we have given above. But what we must be conscious of,
while dealing with prima facie worth of these statements and
documents is that none of them had been seized or recovered
from the appellants but these recoveries are alleged to have been
34 | Pa gemade from the co-accused. The second head of alleged offensive
acts of the appellants is keeping literatures propagating violence
and promoting overthrowing of a democratically elected
government through armed struggle. But again, it is not the
NIA’s case that either of the two appellants is the author of the
materials found from their residences, as alleged. None of these
literatures has been specifically proscribed so as to constitute an
offence, just by keeping them. Thirdly, so far as AF is concerned,
some materials point to handling of finances. But such
finances, as per the materials through which the dealings are
sought to be established, show that the transaction was mainly
for the purpose of litigation on behalf of, it appears to us,
detained party persons. The formation of or association with a
legal front of the banned terrorist organisation has also been
attributed to AF, in addition. The High Court while analysing
each of these documents individually did not opine that there
were reasonable grounds for believing that the accusations
against such persons were not prima facie true. Those offences
which come within Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act, charged
against the appellants, are Sections 16, 17, 18, 18B, 20, 38, 39
and 40. We have summarised the nature of allegations reflected
in the chargesheet as also the affidavit of the NIA. Now we shall
35 | Pa gehave to ascertain if on the basis of these materials, the
prosecution has made out reasonable grounds to persuade the
Court to be satisfied that the accusations against the appellants
are prima facie true. There is charge under Section 13 of the
1967 Act and certain offences under the 1860 Code against the
appellants also. But we shall first deal with the appellants’ case
in relation to charges made against them under the aforesaid
provisions.
25. Section 16 prescribes punishment for committing terrorist
act and terrorist act has been defined in Section 15 of the 1967
statute. We have reproduced these provisions earlier in this
judgment.
26. In none of the materials which have been referred to by the
prosecution, the acts specified to in sub-clause (a) of Section
15(1) of the 1967 Act can be attributed to the appellants. Nor
there is any allegation against them which would attract sub-
clause (c) of Section 15(1) of the said statute. As regards the
acts specified in Section 15(1) (b) thereof, some of the literature
alleged to have been recovered from the appellants, by
themselves give hint of propagation of such activities. But there
is nothing against the appellants to prima facie establish that
36 | Pa gethey had indulged in the activities which would constitute
overawing any public functionary by means of criminal force or
the show of criminal force or attempts by the appellants to do
so. Neither there is allegation against them of causing death of
any public functionary or attempt to cause death of such
functionary. Mere holding of certain literatures through which
violent acts may be propagated would not ipso facto attract the
provisions of Section 15(1)(b) of the said Act. Thus, prima facie,
in our opinion, we cannot reasonably come to a finding that any
case against the appellants under Section 15(1) (b) of 1967 Act
can be held to be true.
27. Section 17 of the 1967 Act deals with punishment for
raising funds for terrorist acts. Here also the funds, dealing
with which has been attributed to AF, cannot be connected to
any terrorist act. In the case of Dr. Anand Teltumbde (supra)
the same account statement was referred to. In respect of such
allegations against Dr. Anand Teltumbde the Bombay High
Court came to the following finding:-
“42. Mr. Patil has vehemently argued that this
statement from the earlier letter supports receipt of
monies i.e. Rs. 90,000/- by Anand T. (Appellant) from
Surendra (accused No. 3) who was authorized to
provide funds for future programmes. On careful
reading of the earlier letter dated 02.01.2018 and the
aforementioned statement of account it is seen that
there is a fallacy in the argument of NIA. Assuming
37 | Pa gethat Anand T. is the Appellant himself and he received
Rs. 90,000/- from Surendra through Milind, firstly it
cannot be linked to the statement in the earlier letter
dated 02.01.2018 since this account statement
pertains to the year 2016 and or 2017. The document
has a heading; viz; Party fund received in last year
from C.C. Last year would invariably mean the
account of 2016 as the title of this document is
“Accounts2K17” which would mean Accounts for
2017”. That apart requiring us to presume that Anand
T. is the Appellant would require further corroboration
and evidence. prima facie it appears that, the same
has not been brought on record. This document is
unsigned and has been recovered from the
laptop one of the co-accused. Hence, at
this prima facie stage we cannot presume that
Anand T. i.e. the Appellant received Rs. 90,000/-
from Surendra Gadling as argued by NIA. We are
afraid to state that we cannot agree with NIA's
contention.”
(emphasis added)
28. Here we must point out that there is also a request made
to Surendra from an unnamed person to ask AF to manage the
financial expenses of “these cases”. The name of another Arun,
with the surname Bhelke has surfaced in Annexure “R-19” to
the NIA’s counter-affidavit in AF’s case. This is a copy of a
witness statement. In absence of any form of corroboration at
the prima facie stage it cannot be presumed that it was the
same Arun (i.e., AF) who had received money from Darsu. The
prosecution has also not produced any material to show that
actual money was transmitted. The communication dated 5th
November 2017 (“R-5”), purportedly addressed by Surendra to
Prakash does not speak of any payment being made to AF. The
38 | Pa gerationale applied by the Bombay High Court in the above-
quoted passage of the judgment in the case of Dr. Anand
Teltumbde (supra), which has been sustained by this Court,
ought to apply in the case of AF as well.
29. We have already observed that it is not possible for us to
form an opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing
that the accusation against the appellant of committing or
conspiring to commit terrorist act is prima facie true. The
witness statements do not refer to any terrorist act alleged to
have been committed by the appellants. The copies of the letters
in which the appellants or any one of them have been referred,
record only third-party response or reaction of the appellants’
activities contained in communications among different
individuals. These have not been recovered from the appellants.
Hence, these communications or content thereof have weak
probative value or quality. That being the position, neither the
provisions of Section 18 nor 18B can be invoked against the
appellants, prima facie, at this stage. The association of the
appellants with the activities of the designated terrorist
organisation is sought to be established through third party
communications. Moreover, actual involvement of the appellants
in any terrorist act has not surfaced from any of these
39 | Pa gecommunications. Nor there is any credible case of conspiracy to
commit offences enumerated under chapters IV and VI of the
1967 Act. Mere participation in seminars by itself cannot
constitute an offence under the bail-restricting Sections of the
1967 Act, with which they have been charged.
30. So far as application of Section 20 of the 1967 Act is
concerned, the Bombay High Court in the case of Dr. Anand
Teltumbde (supra) construed the said provision in the following
manner:-
“52. Section 20 cannot be interpreted to mean that
merely being a member of a terrorist gang would
entail such a member for the above punishment.
What is important is the terrorist act and what is
required for the Court to see is the material before
the Court to show that such a person has been
involved in or has indulged in a terrorist act.
Terrorist act is very widely defined under Section
15. In the present case, seizure of the incriminating
material as alluded to hereinabove does not in any
manner prima facie leads to draw an inferance
that, Appellant has committed or indulged in a
‘terrorist act’ as contemplated under Section 15 of
the UAP Act.”
31. This judgment has not been interfered with by this Court
and we also affirm this interpretation given to Section 20 of the
1967 Act for testing as to who would be a member of terrorist
gang or terrorist organisation. Moreover, no material has been
demonstrated by the NIA before us that the appellants are
members of the terrorist organisation. AF’s involvement with
40 | Pa geIAPL as a frontal organisation of the Communist Party of India
(Maoist) is sought to be established, and that has been referred
to in the chargesheet as well. But the link between IAPL and the
CPI (Maoist) has not been clearly demonstrated through any
material. Reference to AF and VG as members of the CPI (Maoist)
appears from the statement of protected witness, but that link is
made in relation to events between the years 2002-2007, before
the organisation was included in the First Schedule to the 1967
Act. No evidence of continued membership after the party was
classified as a terrorist organisation has been brought to our
notice. Nor is there any reliable evidence to link IAPL with CPI
(Maoist) as its frontal organisation. We have already dealt with
the position of the appellants vis-à-vis terrorist acts in earlier
paragraphs of this judgment and we prima facie do not think
that Section 20 can be made applicable against the appellants at
this stage of the proceeding, on the basis of available materials.
32. “Terrorist act” as defined under Section 2(k) of the 1967 Act
carries the meaning assigned to it in Section 15. This Section
also stipulates that the expressions “terrorism” and “terrorist”
shall be construed accordingly. This implies construction of
41 | Pa gethese two expressions in the same way as has been done in
Section 15.
“terrorist organisation” has been independently defined in
Section 2(m) to mean an organisation listed in the First Schedule
or an organisation operating under the same name as an
organisation so listed. But so far as the word “terrorist” is
concerned, in this Section also, the interpretation thereof would
be relatable to the same expression as used in Section 15. It is
one of the basic rules of statutory construction that an
expression used in different parts of a statute shall ordinarily
convey the same meaning – unless contrary intention appears
from different parts of the same enactment itself. We do not find
any such contrary intention in the 1967 Act.
33. Section 38 of the 1967 Act carries the heading or title
“offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation”.
As we have already observed, a terrorist act would have to be
construed having regard to the meaning assigned to it in Section
15 thereof. We have given our interpretation to this provision
earlier. “terrorist organisation” [as employed in Section 2(m)], in
our opinion is not a mere nomenclature and this expression
would mean an organisation that carries on or indulges in
42 | Pa geterrorist acts, as defined in said Section 15. The term terrorism,
in view of the provisions of Section 2(k) of the said Act, ought to
be interpreted in tandem with what is meant by ‘terrorist Act’ in
Section 15 thereof.
34. In this context, to bring the appellants within the fold of
Section 38 of the 1967 Act, the prosecution ought to have prima
facie establish their association with intention to further the
said organisation’s terrorist activities. It is only when such
intention to further the terrorist activities is established prima
facie, appellants could be brought within the fold of the offence
relating to membership of a terrorist organisation. To bring
within the scope of Section 38 of the 1967 Act, it would not be
sufficient to demonstrate that one is an associate or someone
who professes to be associated with a terrorist organisation. But
there must be intention to further the activities of such
organisation on the part of the person implicated under such
provision. But the same line of reasoning in respect of
membership of a terrorist organisation under Section 20, ought
to apply in respect of an alleged offender implicated in Section 38
of the 1967 Act. There must be evidence of there being intention
to be involved in a terrorist act. So far as the appellants are
43 | Pa geconcerned, at this stage there is no such evidence before us on
which we can rely.
35. In three decisions of this Court, Hitendra Vishnu Thakur
and Others -vs- State of Maharashtra and Others [(1994) 4
SCC 602], Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi, Advocate
-vs- Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya and Others [(1990) 4 SCC 76]
and Usmanbhai Dawoodbhai Memon and Others -vs- State of
Gujarat [(1988) 2 SCC 271], the manner in which stringent
provisions of a statute ought to be interpreted has been laid
down. In all the three authorities, observation of this Court has
been that the Court ought to carefully examine every case,
before making an assessment if the Act would apply or not.
When the statutes have stringent provisions the duty of the
Court would be more onerous. Graver the offence, greater should
be the care taken to see that the offence would fall within the
four corners of the Act. Though these judgments were delivered
while testing similar rigorous provisions under the Terrorist and
Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987, the same principle
would apply in respect of the 1967 Act as well.
36. In the case of Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (supra), it has
been held that the expression “prima facie true” would mean
44 | Pa gethat the materials/evidence collated by the investigating agency
in reference to the accusation against the accused concerned in
the chargesheet must prevail, unless overcome or disproved by
other evidence, and on the face of it, materials must show
complicity of such accused in the commission of the stated
offences. What this ratio contemplates is that on the face of it,
the accusation against the accused ought to prevail. In our
opinion, however, it would not satisfy the prima facie “test”
unless there is at least surface-analysis of probative value of the
evidence, at the stage of examining the question of granting bail
and the quality or probative value satisfies the Court of its
worth. In the case of the appellants, contents of the letters
through which the appellants are sought to be implicated are in
the nature of hearsay evidence, recovered from co-accused.
Moreover, no covert or overt terrorist act has been attributed to
the appellants in these letters, or any other material forming
part of records of these two appeals. Reference to the activities of
the accused are in the nature of ideological propagation and
allegations of recruitment. No evidence of any of the persons
who are alleged to have been recruited or have joined this
“struggle” inspired by the appellants has been brought before us.
Thus, we are unable to accept NIA’s contention that the
45 | Pa geappellants have committed the offence relating to support given
to a terrorist organisation.
37. The second set of materials include the witness statements.
There also no covert or overt act of terrorism has been attributed
to the appellants by the three witnesses. We have dealt with the
summary of their statements earlier in this judgment. We have
also observed earlier that mere possession of the literature, even
if the content thereof inspires or propagates violence, by itself
cannot constitute any of the offences within Chapters IV and VI
of the 1967 Act.
38. We have already analysed Sections 38 and 39 of the 1967
Act. The interpretation given by us to the phrase “intention to
further activities” of terrorist organisation could also apply in
the same way in relation to Section 39 of the same statute.
There has been no credible evidence against the appellants of
commission of any terrorist act or enter into conspiracy to do so
to invoke the provisions of Section 43D (5) of the 1967 Act.
39. As far as raising funds for a terrorist organisation is
concerned, we do not think at this stage, in absence of better
evidence, the account statement is credible enough to justify
46 | Pa geinvoking the bail-restricting clause by attracting Section 40 of
the 1967 Act.
40. We are returning these findings as the restrictions on the
Court while examining the question of bail under the 1967 Act is
less stringent in comparison to the provisions of Section 37 of
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985. We
are not called upon, for granting a bail to an accused with
commercial quantity of contraband article under the 1985 Act,
to satisfy ourselves that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that an accused is not guilty of such offence and that
he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail. Here, we
have to satisfy ourselves that the specified offences alleged to
have been committed by the appellants cannot be held to be
prima facie true.
41. We shall now turn to the other offence under the 1967 Act,
which is under Section 13 thereof, and the 1860 Code offences.
The yardstick for justifying the appellants’ plea for bail is lighter
in this context. The appellants are almost five years in detention.
In the cases of K.A. Najeeb (supra) and Angela Harish
Sontakke (supra), delay of trial was considered to be a relevant
factor while examining the plea for bail of the accused. In the
47 | Pa gecase of K.A. Najeeb (supra), in particular, this same provision,
that is Section 43D (5) was involved.
42. In these two proceedings, the appellants have not crossed,
as undertrials, a substantial term of the sentence that may have
been ultimately imposed against them if the prosecution could
establish the charges against them. But the fundamental
proposition of law laid down in K.A. Najeeb (supra), that a bail-
restricting clause cannot denude the jurisdiction of a
Constitutional Court in testing if continued detention in a given
case would breach the concept of liberty enshrined in Article 21
of the Constitution of India, would apply in a case where such a
bail-restricting clause is being invoked on the basis of materials
with prima facie low-probative value or quality.
43. In the case of Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (supra)
reference was made to the judgment of Jayendra Saraswathi
Swamigal -vs- State of Tamil Nadu [(2005) 2 SCC 13) in
which, citing two earlier decisions of this court in the cases of
State -vs- Jagjit Singh (AIR 1962 SC 253) and Gurcharan
Singh -vs- State of (UT of Delhi) [(1978) 1 SCC 118), the
factors for granting bail under normal circumstances were
discussed. It was held that the nature and seriousness of the
48 | Pa geoffences, the character of the evidence, circumstances which are
peculiar to the accused, a reasonable possibility of the presence
of the accused not being secured at the trial; reasonable
apprehension of witnesses being tempered with; the larger
interest of the public or the State would be relevant factors for
granting or rejecting bail. Juxtaposing the appellants’ case
founded on Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India with
the aforesaid allegations and considering the fact that almost
five years have lapsed since they were taken into custody, we are
satisfied that the appellants have made out a case for granting
bail. Allegations against them no doubt are serious, but for that
reason alone bail cannot be denied to them. While dealing with
the offences under Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act, we have
referred to the materials available against them at this stage.
These materials cannot justify continued detention of the
appellants, pending final outcome of the case under the others
provisions of the 1860 Code and the 1967 Act.
44. While forming our opinion over granting bail to the
appellants, we have taken into account the fact that that VG was
once earlier convicted involving offences, inter-alia, under 1967
Act and there is also a pending criminal case against him on the
49 | Pa geallegations of similar line of activities. Hence, we propose to
impose appropriate conditions in respect of both, which they
shall have to comply with, while on bail.
45. We accordingly set aside the impugned judgments and
direct that the appellants be released on bail in respect of the
cases(s) out of which the present appeals arise, on such terms
and conditions the Special Court may consider fit and proper, if
the appellants or any one of them are not wanted in respect of
any other case. The conditions to be imposed by the Special
Court shall include:-
(a) Vernon Gonsalves, appellant in Criminal Appeal
No.639 of 2023 and Arun Ferreira, appellant in
Criminal Appeal No.640 of 2023, upon being enlarged
on bail shall not leave the State of Maharashtra
without obtaining permission from the Trial Court.
(b) Both the appellants shall surrender their passports, if
they possess so, during the period they remain on bail
with the Investigating Officer of the NIA.
(c) Both the appellants shall inform the Investigating
Officer of the NIA, the addresses they shall reside in.
(d) Both the appellants shall use only one Mobile Phone
each, during the time they remain on bail and shall
50 | Pa geinform the Investigating Officer of the NIA, their
respective mobile numbers.
(e) Both the appellants shall also ensure that their
Mobile Phones remain active and charged round the
clock so that they remain constantly accessible
throughout the period they remain on bail.
(f) During this period, that is the period during which
they remain on bail, both the appellants shall keep
the location status of their mobile phones active, 24
hours a day and their phones shall be paired with
that of the Investigating Officer of the NIA to enable
him, at any given time, to identify the appellants’
exact location.
(g) Both the appellants shall report to the Station House
Officer of the Police Station within whose jurisdiction
they shall reside while on bail once a week.
46. In the event there is breach of any of these conditions, or
any of the conditions to be imposed by the Trial Court
independently, it would be open to the prosecution to seek
cancellation of the bail of each or any of the defaulting
appellants without any further reference to this Court.
Similarly, if the appellants seek to threaten or otherwise
influence any of the witnesses, whether directly or indirectly,
then also the prosecution shall be at liberty to seek cancellation
51 | Pa geof bail of the concerned appellant by making appropriate
application before the Trial Court.
47. The appeals stand allowed in the above terms.
48. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
...............................J.
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE)
.................................J.
(SUDHANSHU DHULIA)
NEW DELHI
28TH JULY, 2023
52 | Pa geITEM NO.1501 COURT NO.6 SECTION II-A
(For Judgment)
S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal No. 639/2023
VERNON Appellant(s)
VERSUS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR. Respondent(s)
WITH
Crl.A. No. 640/2023 (II-A)
Date : 28-07-2023 These matters were called on for pronouncement of
judgment today.
For Appellant(s) Rebecca John, Sr. Adv.
Mr. R. Basant, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Jawahar Raja, Adv.
Chinmay Kanojia, Adv.
Mr. Archit Krishna, Adv.
Mr. N. Sai Vinod, AOR
Mr. Vishnu P, Adv.
Ms. Varsha Sharma, Adv.
For Respondent(s) Mr. Anand Dilip Landge, Adv.
Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Adv.
Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, AOR
Mr. Bharat Bagla, Adv.
Mr. Sourav Singh, Adv.
Mr. Aditya Krishna, Adv.
Mr. Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General
Mr. K M Nataraj, A.S.G.
Mr. Sharath Nambiar, Adv.
Mr. Nakul Chnegappa K.K., Adv.
Mr. Vatsal Joshi, Adv.
Ms. Indra Bhakar, Adv.
Mr. Vinayak Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Anuj Srinivas Udupa, Adv.
Mr. Chitransh Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Kanu Agarwal, Adv.
Ms. Swati Ghildiyal, Adv.
Ms. Deepabali Dutta, Adv.
Ms. Sairica S Raju, Adv.
Mr. Sabarish Subramanyam, Adv.
Mr. Arvind Kumar Sharma, AOR
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Aniruddha Bose has
pronounced the Judgment of the Bench comprising
53 | Pa geHis Lordship and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sudhanshu
Dhulia.
The appeals stand allowed; the impugned
judgments are set aside and direct that the
appellants be released on bail in respect of the
cases(s) out of which the present appeals arise
in terms of the signed Reportable Judgment.
Pending application(s), if any, shall
stand disposed of.
(SNEHA DAS) (VIDYA NEGI)
SENIOR PERSONAL ASSISTANT ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed Reportable Judgment is placed on the file)
54 | Pa ge