http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 6
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 1272 of 1999
PETITIONER:
BHAGWAN SINGH & ORS.
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
STATE OF M.P.
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 22/03/2002
BENCH:
R.P. Sethi & K.G. Balakrishnan
JUDGMENT:
SETHI, J.
The appellants, alongwith two others, were charged under Sections 148, 302, 336, 337
, 427 read
with Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Burhanp
ur and after
trial acquitted by the trial court vide its judgment dated 24th June, 1987. The appeal file
d by the State
against the order of acquittal was allowed by the High Court vide the judgment impugned conv
icting the
appellants for offences under Section 302/149 and sentencing them to life imprisonment besid
es paying a
fine of Rs.5,000/- each in default of which they have been directed to suffer further rigoro
us imprisonment
for one year each. They were also convicted for the commission of offence under Section 148
IPC and
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for one year each.
Not satisfied with the judgment of the High Court, the appellants have preferred thi
s appeal under
Section 379 of the Code of Criminal Procedure read with Order XXI Rules 12 to 29 of the Supr
eme Court
Rules, 1966.
According to the prosecution there was a dispute between Amarnath (deceased) and Ram
Singh,
appellant with respect to four mango trees grown on Khasra No.212 situated at Village Sarai.
Litigation
was pending between both the parties and police had registered several cases under Sections
147 and 145 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure. According to the FIR recorded on the statement of PW22 Jagd
ish that he
along with his family members was watching TV at his house. Amarnath and Hari Ram were also
there.
When he was about to start his meals, they heard the cries of "Bachao-Bachao" (save-save) ra
ised by
Surender. They saw all the 16 accused persons assaulting Surender with lathis, Dhariya, Kha
rtaliya and
Pata. When Hari Ram went to intervene, the accused attacked him. Similarly when Amarnath w
ent
forward he was also assaulted. Ram Singh instigated other accused persons to finish Amarnathttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 6
h saying that
as he was responsible for everything, he should be finished today. Thereafter Ram Singh, Bh
agwan Singh,
Sardar Singh, Roop Singh and Dhyansingh attacked Amarnath with lethal weapons in their posse
ssion.
Witness rushed forward to save his father and was also attacked by the aforesaid accused per
sons. He ran
away to the house to save himself. The accused then threw stones on the house which broke r
oof tiles,
doors and also damaged the walls. After registration of the FIR, the investigating officers
sent the injured,
namely, Surender and Hari Ram to the District Hospital, Khandwa where they died the same nig
ht, the
information of which was sent to the police by Hospital Authorities. Mukesh was also found
injured and
sent for treatment to the hospital. In the occurrence three persons, namely, Surender, Hari
Ram and
Amarnath were murdered and some of the witnesses injured.
The trial court acquitted the accused persons on finding that appellants Bhagwan Sin
gh, Ram
Singh, Roop Singh had received injuries and "seeing danger of life and other accused utilise
d right of
private defence and there aggressors died and rest aggressors fled away. Hence the act of t
he accused fall
within the definition of right of private defence u/s 100 IPC and their act is not punishabl
e according to
provisions of section 96 IPC". The trial court further held, "I find that prosecution faile
d to prove case
beyond reasonable doubts and accused committed murder of deceased Amarnath, Surender and Har
iram
and caused injuries to Mukesh witness and damaged house of Jagdish after throwing stones". H
olding that
the prosecution had failed to prove the offence against accused beyond all reasonable doubts
and giving
them the benefit of right of self-defence, as contemplated under Section 100 IPC, he acquitt
ed the accused
persons.
The High Court rightly found that the trial court had been led astray by the simple
fact that the
injuries on the person of the accused had not been explained by the prosecution witnesses.
After referring
to number of judgments of this Court, the High Court concluded:
"In view of what we have discussed about the circumstances
of the case, the injuries on the persons of the three
deceased, the sequence in which the witnesses reached the
spot of crime, minor nature of the injuries on the persons
of the accused except one injury on the head of Bhagwan
Singh and the background and also the sequence in which the
deceased were attacked, rules out any possibility of the
accused having attacked the three deceased in exercise of
self-defence of any of them. It is clear that the accused
persons were the aggressors."
After critically and minutely examining the evidence on record,
the High Court found that the presence of eye-witnesses, namely, Kiran
(PW7), Mukesh (PW12) and Jagdish (PW22) cannot be doubted. In this
regard the court held:
"A striking feature of this case is that one of the accused
Sardarsingh lodged a report Ex.D-5 at 11.30 p.m. that 4
persons i.e. Amarnath, Jagdish, Surendra and Hariram werehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 6
assaulting Bhagwansingh and Roopsingh. Even here Jagdish
witness was shown present and there was no mention of
Ramsingh accused. Then in cross examination to these three
eye-witnesses the suggestions have been that the deceased
and the witnesses along with others assaulted the accused at
the house of Ramsingh. The trial court has ignored this
trend of cross examination on behalf of the accused in
appreciating whether the witnesses were present at the scene
of violence. In the facts and circumstances of a given
case, the trend of cross-examination by defence or
prosecution witness can provide support to the inference if
some accused and witnesses were present at the scene of
crime. The most striking feature is the fact that such a
report was recorded by the police and they at one proceeded
to the scene of crime. There is no mention in Ex.D-5 if any
serious injury was given to Sardarsingh or Roopsing and
whether any weapon has been used or only fists blows were
being exchanged. Still the police rushed to the scene of
crime at the night. This is rare. This indicates that
there was some under current working between the police and
the accused persons. The police could not but have recorded
the Dehati Nalishi on finding one person died and 2 in the
process of dying with fatal injuries. This is followed by
lapse of the investigating officer in recorded statement of
Mukesh and Kiran after 7 days if Kiran had not witnesses the
occurrence there was no need to introduce her as a witness
when there were witnesses such as Jagdish and Mukesh whose
presence at that spot could hardly be challenged. So, if
anything, investigation was unfair towards the complainant
party and not against the accused persons."
and concluded:
"So we find the testimony of these witnesses, trustworthy
and also confirmatory to each other. Their presence is
established at the scene of crime. Their testimony is
corroborated by FIR and by medical evidence."
We do not agree with the submissions of the learned counsel for
the appellants that under Section 378 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
the High Court could not disturb the finding of facts of the trial court
even if it found that the view taken by the trial court was not proper.
On the basis of the pronouncements of this Court, the settled position
of law regarding the powers of the High Court in an appeal against an
order of acquittal is that the Court has full powers to review the
evidence upon which an order of acquittal is based and generally it will
not interfere with the order of acquittal because by passing an order of
acquittal the presumption of innocence in favour of the accused is
reinforced. The golden thread which runs through the web of
administration of justice in criminal case is that if two views are
possible on the evidence adduced in the case, one pointing to the guilt
of the accused and the other to his innocence, the view which is
favourable to the accused should be adopted. Such is not a jurisdiction
limitation on the appellate court but a Judge made guidelines for
circumspection. The paramount consideration of the court is to ensure
that miscarriage of justice is avoided. A miscarriage of justice which
may arise from the acquittal of guilty is no less than from the
conviction of an innocent. In a case where the trial court has taken a
view ignoring the admissible evidence, a duty is cast upon the High
Court to reappreciate the evidence in acquittal appeal for the purposes
of ascertaining as to whether all or any of the accused has committed
any offence or not. Probable view taken by the trial court which may
not be disturbed in the appeal is such a view which is based upon legal
and admissible evidence. In the instant case the trial court acquitted
the respondents by not relying upon the testimony of three eye-http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 6
witnesses, namely, Kiran (PW7), Mukesh (PW12) and Jagdish (PW22) on
considerations which apparently appeared to be extraneous. Such
findings of acquittal apparently are based upon erroneous views or the
result of ignoring legal and admissible evidence with the result that
the findings arrived at by the trial court are held to be erroneous.
The High Court has ascribed valid reasons for believing the statements
of those witnesses by pointing out the illegalities committed by the
trial court in discarding their testimonies. The High Court has also
rightly held that the trial court completely ignored the basic
principles of law in criminal jurisprudence which entitles the accused
to claim the benefit of right of self-defence. Without there being any
legal and admissible evidence but swayed by finding some injuries on the
person of the accused, the trial court wrongly held that the respondents
were justified in causing the death of three persons in exercise of
their right of self-defence. No fault, therefore, can be found in the
judgment of the High Court on this ground.
Learned counsel appearing for the appellants further submitted
that the prosecution has failed to prove the existence of common object
amongst the accused and even if the occurrence is held to have taken
place in the manner as alleged by the prosecution each of the accused is
responsible for his own acts and cannot be held vicariously liable for
the acts done by the other accused persons.
Common object, as contemplated by Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code, does not req
uire prior
concert or meeting of minds before the attack. Generally no direct evidence is available re
garding the
existence of common object which, in each case, has to be ascertained from the attending fac
ts and
circumstances. When a concerted attack is made on the victim by a large number of persons a
rmed with
deadly weapons, it is often difficult to determine the actual part played by each offender a
nd easy to hold
that such persons attacked the victim had the common object for an offence which was known t
o be likely
to be committed in prosecution of such an object. It is true that a mere innocent person, i
n an assembly of
persons or being a by-stander does not make such person a member of an unlawful assembly but
where the
persons forming the assembly are shown to be having identical interest in pursuance of which
some of them
come armed, others though not armed would, under the normal circumstances, be deemed to be t
he
members of the unlawful assembly. In this case the accused persons have been proved to be o
n inimical
terms with the complainant-party. The enmity between the parties had been aggravated on acc
ount of
litigation with respect to the dispute over the mango trees. Accused persons who came on th
e spot are
shown to have come armed with deadly weapons. The facts and circumstances of the case unequ
ivocally
prove the existence of the common object of such persons forming the unlawful assembly who h
ad come
on the spot and attacked the complainant party in consequence of which three precious lives
were lost. The
High Court was, therefore, justified in holding that the accused persons, involved in the oc
currence, had
shared the common object.
When the matter was again listed for re-hearing on 19th March, 2002, Mr.Jain, learne
d counsel
appearing for the appellants submitted that besides appellants Bhagwan Singh (A1), Dhyan Sin
gh (A2)
Datar Singh (A7), Suraj Singh (A8) and Raghunath Singh (A12), the other accused cannot be cohttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 6
nvicted or
sentenced as they have not been named by the witnesses in their statements recorded at the t
rial. A faint
effort was also made to show that the names of all the accused persons were not mentioned in
the FIR
which justify the acquittal of accused persons other than A1, A2, A7, A8 and A12. Upon anal
ysis of the
record, we do not find any substance in the submission of the learned counsel for the appell
ants. Names of
all the accused persons are mentioned in FIR (Exhibit P-77) which was lodged by Jagdish (PW2
2). It is
mentioned in the FIR that when after hearing the voice of Surender, Jagdish (PW22) came out
of the house,
he saw Datar Singh, Suraj Singh, Raghunath Kunbi, Sukhdev Kunbi, Sadashiv Kunbi, Vasdev Kunb
i,
Chheeter Kunbi, Premlal Gurjar, Gajender Singh Nakedar, Ram Singh, Bhagwan Singh, Sardar Sin
gh,
Roop Singh, Dhayan Singh armed with lathis, dharia, Khirale, patte. They were assaulting Su
render and
when Hari Ram went to protect him, they attacked him. Similarly when his father went to sav
e Surender
and Hari Ram, he was also attacked and accused Ram Singh told the other persons that the fat
her of PW22
was the main person responsible for all the troubles and should be finished, whereafter accu
sed Ram Singh,
Bhagwan Singh, Roop Singh and Dhayan Singh inflicted injuries on the person of the father of
the witness.
When the witness tried to save the victims, the accused persons ran towards him and to save
his life he
entered in his house and closed the door from inside. In his statement, recorded in the cou
rt on 9.4.1987,
Jagdish (PW22) stated that when he came out of his house he saw all the 16 accused persons b
eating
Surender. He has specifically mentioned the names of Bhagwan Singh, Dhayan Singh, Sardar Si
ngh and
Roop Sing who were having deadly weapons in their hands. All the accused persons were beati
ng
Surender and when Hari Ram went to save him, he was attacked. Similarly, Amarnath, the fath
er of the
witness was also attacked and severely injured. Kiran (PW7) in his statement, recorded in t
he court on
17.2.1987, stated that "then there came the voice of shouting of Surendra that save me save
me Bhagwan is
killing me. I ran and went towards the noise. I went there and saw that Ram Singh, Bhagwan
Singh,
Dhayan Singh, Sardar Singh, Umrao Singh, Roop Singh, Datar Singh, Suraj Singh, Sadashiv, Suk
hdev,
Vasudev, Raghunath and the forest guard Gajra, Premlal, Gajnan all these people were beating
up
Surender, Hariram and Amarnath. On seeing the accused Chheeter said that he was also there
and these
were all the accused persons who were beating. These people were beating up with sticks, kh
irale and
pattee (sic). These people were shouting that kill these Punjabis, kill each and every one
of them.
Bhagwan Singh was saying that kill this old man also and he only does everything. He was ca
lling
Amarnath as old person. These three persons fell down because of beating and got soaked in
blood".
Mukesh (PW12), in his statement recorded on 19.2.1987, stated that "when I reached n
ear home, I
heard a brawl from the side of Jagdish’s house. I left the cart to see it. When I saw from
near the house of
the accused Bhagwan, the accused persons coming from the side of Laxman Patel’s house were ghttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 6 of 6
oing to the
side of Amarnath’s house. In front of my eyes, Hariram fell down in front of Laxman Patel’s
house. The
assailant had wooden objects, Khiralas and Pattas, they were hitting with them. Amarnath wa
s seen
collapsing near Narmada’s house. Then, the accused persons started pelting stones on my sid
e. One stone
hit me on my right shoulder. Then I ran home".
In view of cogent, reliable and confidence inspiring testimony of PWs 7, 12 and 22,
it cannot be
said that the names of all the accused persons were not mentioned in the FIR which entitled
some of them
to be acquitted. The High Court has rightly found that the names of all the accused persons
were
mentioned in the FIR and repeated by the witnesses in their depositions made in the trial co
urt. From the
questions put in cross-examination, it also transpires that the accused persons never doubte
d the factum of
their names being mentioned by the witnesses in the FIR and in their statements recorded at
the trial.
We also do not find any substance in the submission of the learned counsel for the a
ppellants that
statement of Kiran (PW7) should not be given any weight because her name is not mentioned in
the FIR.
There is no requirement of law for mentioning the names of all the witnesses in the FIR, the
object of
which is only to set the criminal law in motion. Kiran (PW7) herself was injured and being
the niece of
Hari Ram (deceased), had no reason to involve innocent persons in the commission of the crim
e. Merely
because PWs 7, 12 and 22 happen to be the relations of the deceased, cannot be made a ground
to discard
their evidence. In the circumstances of the case, the High Court has rightly found the afore
said witnesses to
be natural witnesses of the occurrence.
There is no merit in this appeal which is accordingly dismissed.
......................J.
(R.P. Sethi)
......................J.
(K.G. Balakrishnan)
March 22 , 2002