REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1902 OF 2010
SHINDO ALIAS SAWINDER KAUR AND ANR. .. APPELLANT(S)
vs.
STATE OF PUNJAB .. RESPONDENT(S)
O
R D E R
This appeal arises out of the following facts:
On the 19th March, 1999 ASI Gurmit Singh posted at
police station, Mehta received information from the Guru
Nanak Dev Hospital, Amritsar to the effect that one Balbir
Kaur was lying admitted in the hospital with severe burn
injuries. The police officer rushed to the hospital at
about 8.15 p.m. and found her lying admitted in the 5thSurgical Ward. An application was thereafter moved by the
police officer seeking the opinion of the doctor regarding
her fitness to make a statement as her condition was
critical. The ASI then went on to record the statement
(Ext.PC). In her statement Balbir Kaur stated that she had
been married with Jarnail Singh about three years prior to
the date of the incident and two children had been born
from the marriage and that during the course of the
-2-
deliberations before the marriage and even thereafter
several articles of dowry had been given to satisfy thedemands of the two accused Shindo-her mother-in-law and
Paramjit Kaur-her married sister-in-law. She further
stated that on account of the harassment meted out to her
by the two accused an additional sum of rupees one lakh had
been obtained by her from her father and handed over to
them. She further went on to say that at about 2.20 p.m.
on that date the two accused who were present along with
her in the house had asked her to bring more money from
her parents but she had replied that as her father had
already given sufficient dowry as per his status nothing
more would be brought by her and this had apparently
annoyed the accused and whereas Shindo had poured kerosene
oil on her, Paramjit Kaur had set her alight causing severe
burn injuries. She further stated that on receiving
information about the happening, her husband Jarnail Singh
had rushed back from his shop and after arranging a vehiclehad taken her to Amritsar and had got her admitted to the
hospital. On the very next day i.e. on the 20th March, 1999
Ajit Singh (PW.2) Balbir Kaur's father, moved an
application (Ext. P.H.) requesting the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Amritsar to record the statement of his
daughter as the police was not doing the necessary
investigations. The CJM directed the duty Magistrate to do
-3-
the needful whereupon the Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class,
recorded another statement of Balbir Kaur in the hospital
after obtaining a certificate of fitness from Dr. RahulGupta, the attending doctor. In this statement she gave
almost the same details as in the statement made to the
ASI. Balbir Kaur died on the 23rd march 1999 and a case
under Sections 304-B and 498-A was registered. On the
completion of the investigation a charge under Section
302/34 and in the alternative 304-B/34 read with Section
498-A of the IPC was framed against the two accused. The
Trial Court in the Course of an elaborate judgment observed
that the two dying declarations, one made by the ASI, and
another to the Judicial Magistrate could not be relied
upon, primarily for the reason that Balbir Kaur was in a
very serious condition with 100% burn injuries and would
not have been able to give a dying declaration to the ASI.
The second dying declaration was rejected as well on the
additional ground that Dr. Rahul Gupta who had given the
endorsement of her fitness had not even been cited as aprosecution witness during the trial. The trial Judge
also rejected the evidence with regard to the demand of
dowry of PW.2 Ajit Singh, as it was brought out during
the course of the cross examination that in his statement
under Sec.161 Cr.P.C. he had not referred to any such
demands having been made by the accused. The Trial Court
accordingly acquitted both the accused.
-4-
An appeal was thereafter taken by the State to the
Punjab and Haryana High Court. The High Court has endorsed
the opinion of the Trial Court that both the dying
declarations deserved to be rejected. However, the HighCourt relying on the evidence of PW.2, held that demands
for dowry soon before the death had indeed been made and
that some parts of two dying declarations supported the
allegations of such demands and as the death was
undoubtedly unnatural the ingredients of Section 304-B were
spelt out against the accused. The judgment of the Trial
Court was accordingly reversed and the accused were
convicted under Section 304-B of the IPC and 498-A of the
IPC and sentenced to imprisonment for seven years and under
498-A to two years with a fine of Rs.5000/- in default,
to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of
six months, both the sentences to run concurrently.This
appeal has been filed challenging the order of the High
Court.
During the course of the hearing today Mr. Nagender
Rai, the learned senior counsel for the appellant, hasargued that in the light of the fact that the dying
declarations had been rejected by both the Courts the only
other evidence if at all was the statement of PW.2 Ajit
Singh and as his evidence pertaining to the demands of
dowry was uncertain his statement could not be relied
-5-
upon. He has also taken us to the evidence of PW.2 Ajit
Singh and we have gone through the same very carefully. In
his examination in chief he did refer to the fact that
demands for dowry had been made and that Balbir Kaur, his
daughter, had been harassed on that account. However, hewas confronted with his statement under Section 161 of the
Cr.P.C. and has forced to admit that no such demand had
been referred to in the said statement. We find that the
improvements made by PW.2 Ajit Singh in his evidence in
Court clearly spells out a case of doubt with regard to the
veracity of his evidence. It is also extremely significant
that in the applications Exh. PH(2) and PH(3) dated 20th
March, 1999 which he had had made before the CJM requesting
that the the dying declaration of his daughter be recorded,
he had referred to the fact that the demands for dowry had
been made by her husband Jarnail Singh and he was the one
to have set her alight. We find that there is no reference
whatsoever to the appellants before us either to the
demands of dowry or their involvement in any manner.
Mr. Kuldip Singh, the learned State counsel has
however argued that the dying declarations particularly theone recorded by the Magistrate required to be accepted. He
has pointed out that though Dr. Rahul Gupta had not been
cited as a witness but from the evidence of the Dr.Jagdish
Singh Gill(Pw.1) who had conducted the post-mortem
-6-
examination, it was clear that a person with 100% burn
injuries could also make a lucid statement and as such it
was apparent that Balbir Kaur had been in a fit condition
to make a statement. We see from the evidence of PW.1 that
his evidence was general in nature with regard to the
capacity of a person suffering from 100% burn injuries tomake a statement. In the case before us, however, Dr.
Rahul Gupta had given a positive opinion that she was in a
fit condition to make a statement but he was not even
cited as a prosecution witness. Both the Courts have
therefore found that the two dying declarations were not
trustworthy or capable of reliance.
We also notice that the High Court was dealing with
an appeal against acquittal. Undoubtedly in a case of a
dowry death under Section 304-B, a presumption of Sec.113-B
does arise against the accused. However, the presumption
is relateable to the fact that the prosecution must first
spell out the ingredients of the offence and then only can
a presumption arise. In the present case we find that the
death was an unnatural one and had taken place within seven
years of the marriage but the third ingredient that any
demand for dowry had been made soon before the death hasnot been proved. In this view of the matter the
presumption under Section. 113-B of the evidence cannot be
-7-
raised. We accordingly allow this appeal; set aside the
judgment/order of the High Court.
The appellants are in custody; they shall be
released forthwith if not required in any other case..................J.
(HARJIT SINGH BEDI)
New Delhi,
March 31, 2011.
....................J.
(CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)