http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 3
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 606 of 2001
PETITIONER:
RAJEEV CHAUDHARY
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
STATE (N.C.T.) OF DELHI
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 04/05/2001
BENCH:
M.B. Shah & S.N. Variava
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
Shah, J.
Leave granted.
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J
Short question involved in this appeal is with regard to
the interpretation and construction of the expression
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less
than ten years occurring in proviso (a) to Section 167(2)
of the Criminal Procedure Code in context of the expression
imprisonment which may extend to ten years occurring in
Section 386 of the IPC.
Appellant was arrested in connection with an offence
punishable under Sections 386, 506 and 120-B of the I.P.C.
He was produced before the Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi on
31.10.1998 and was released on bail by order dated 2.1.1999
by the Metropolitan Magistrate on the ground that
charge-sheet was not submitted within 60 days as provided
under Section 167(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
That order was challenged before the Sessions Judge, New
Delhi by filing Criminal Revision No.22 of 1999. By
judgment and order dated 18.8.1999, the Additional Sessions
Judge, New Delhi allowed the said revision application. The
learned Additional Sessions Judge held that for an offence
under Section 386 IPC, period of sentence could be up to 10
years RI. Hence, clause (i) of the proviso (a) to Section
167 (2) would be applicable. He, therefore, set aside the
order passed by the Metropolitan Magistrate releasing the
accused on bail. That order was challenged before the High
Court by the accused. The High Court referred to its
earlier decisions and held that expression an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less than 10
years in clause (i) of the proviso to Section 167 would
mean an offence punishable with imprisonment for a specified
period which period would not be less than 10 years or in
other words would be at least ten years. The words not
less than qualify the period. These words put emphasis on
the period of ten years and mean period must be clear ten
years. It was further held that on a plain reading ofhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 3
clause (i) of proviso (a) to sub-section (2) of Section 167
Cr. P.C., there seemed to be no doubt that offences
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment
for a term of ten years or more would fall under clause (i)
and offences which are punishable with imprisonment for less
than ten years would fall under clause (ii). Hence, the
High Court set aside the order passed by the Additional
Sessions Judge. That order is challenged in this appeal.
Section 167 is a provision which authorises the
Magistrate permitting detention of an accused in custody and
prescribing the maximum period for which such detention
could be ordered pending investigation. We are concerned
with the interpretation of proviso (a) of Section 167(2)
which reads thus:-
167. Procedure when investigation cannot be
completed in twenty-four hours. (2)..
Provided that
(a) the Magistrate may authorise the detention of the
accused person otherwise than in the custody of the police,
beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that
adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no Magistrate shall
authorise the detention of the accused person in custody
under this paragraph for a total period exceeding,
(i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an
offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years;
(ii)
Further, Section 386 of I.P.C. provides as under:
386. Extortion by putting a person in fear of death or
grievous hurt. Whoever commits extortion by putting any
person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person
or to any other, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
(Emphasis added) @@
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
From the relevant part of the aforesaid sections, it is
apparent that pending investigation relating to an offence@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
punishable with imprisonment for a term not less than 10@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
years, the Magistrate is empowered to authorise the
detention of the accused in custody for not more than 90
days. For rest of the offences, period prescribed is 60
days. Hence in cases, where offence is punishable with
imprisonment for 10 years or more, accused could be detained
up to a period of 90 days. In this context, the expression
not less than would mean imprisonment should be 10 years
or more and would cover only those offences for which
punishment could be imprisonment for a clear period of 10
years or more. Under Section 386 punishment provided is
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to 10 years and also fine. That means, imprisonmenthttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 3
can be for a clear period of 10 years or less. Hence, it
could not be said that minimum sentence would be 10 years or
more. Further, in context also if we consider clause (i) of
proviso (a) to Section 167(2), it would be applicable in
case where investigation relates to an offence punishable
(1) with death; (2) imprisonment for life; and (3)
imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years. It
would not cover the offence for which punishment could be
imprisonment for less than 10 years. Under Section 386 of
the IPC, imprisonment can vary from minimum to maximum of 10
years and it cannot be said that imprisonment prescribed is
not less than 10 years.
In the result, the appeal is dismissed.