1
2023 INSC 1027
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3619 OF 2023
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO.5136 OF 2022)
SIVAMANI AND ANR. … APPELLANTS
APPELLANT NO.1: SIVAMANI
APPELLANT NO.2: DINESH KUMAR
VERSUS
STATE REPRESENTED BY INSPECTOR OF POLICE,
VELLORE TALUK POLICE STATION,
VELLORE DISTRICT. … RESPONDENT
J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2. Leave granted.2
3. The present appeal is directed against the
Final Order and Judgment dated 06.08.2021
(hereinafter referred to as the “Impugned Judgment”)
passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras
(hereinafter referred to as the “High Court”) in
Criminal Appeal No.228 of 2015, whereby the appeal
filed by the appellants against their conviction by
the Trial Court under Section 307 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the
“IPC”) and imposition of fine of Rs.1000/- each has
been confirmed, but the sentence of 10 years
Rigorous Imprisonment has been reduced to 5 years
Rigorous Imprisonment.
THE FACTUAL PRISM:
4. The appellants along with three others were
named by the Complainant in First Information Report
No.409/12 dated 15.09.2012 under Sections 294(b),
323, 324, 452 and 307 read with 109 of the IPC
accusing them of a conspiracy to cause the death of
the Complainant. Upon trial, the Accused Nos.1, 23
and 5 were acquitted and the appellants, who were
Accused Nos.3 and 4 were convicted under Section
307, IPC and sentenced to 10 years’ Rigorous
Imprisonment and fined Rs.1000/- each. The appeal
preferred by the appellants before the High Court
did not succeed in full, and only resulted in the
sentence of Rigorous Imprisonment being reduced from
10 years to 5 years. This gives rise to the present
appeal.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANTS:
5. Learned counsel for the appellants submitted
that the case of the prosecution is that there was
previous enmity between the Complainant-Prakash
alias Chinnaraj/PW1 and Accused No.1. He detailed
the prosecution story as follows. It was submitted
that PW1 and Accused No.1 had a dispute concerning a
lane between their houses. A civil case in such
respect was also pending between them. During the
pendency of the suit, an Advocate Commissioner was
appointed through the Court, who measured the land4
in dispute and allotted portions to Accused No.1 and
PW1. PW1 had put up fencing within the portion
allotted to him, and on account of this, Accused
No.1 used to quarrel with him. Fifteen days prior to
the incident, Accused No.1 had removed the fencing
and again picked up a quarrel with PW1 and
threatened to kill him. Pursuant thereto, Accused
No.1 conspired with the Accused Nos.2, 3, 4 and 5 to
put an end to the life of PW1. Consequently, on
15.09.2012, while PW1 was in his grocery shop, on
the instigation of Accused No.1, Accused Nos.2 and 5
along with the appellants (Accused Nos.3 and 4)
reached the shop. Accused No.2 is stated to have
abused PW1 in filthy and obscene language and beaten
him with force on his cheek by hand. The appellants
tried to attack PW1 with a knife, but PW1 escaped
from their attack and caught hold of the appellants’
hands, as a result of which, sustained abrasion
injuries on his right shoulder and left thumb. On
hearing this alarm, PW2-Indirani (PW1’s mother) came
to his rescue and at that time, the Accused No.55
attacked her with a cold drink bottle on her back,
causing a simple injury. Meanwhile, the neighbours
came to the scene of occurrence and tried to save
PW1 and on seeing them, the Accused Nos.2 and 5
escaped in an auto-rickshaw. The appellants were
caught by the villagers and were tied to a
streetlamp post. Thereafter, they were produced
before the respondent-police by the villagers.
6. However, it was pointed out that the
allegations against all the accused being more or
less similar in nature, the appellants could not
have been convicted under Section 307, IPC as the
doctor (PW13) itself found the injuries to be simple
in nature and not on any vital part of the body.
Moreover, it was submitted that there was no
intention to kill; neither there were repeated
blows, nor was it pre-planned, when admittedly there
was a civil suit pending between Accused No.1 and
PW1. It was submitted that even the prosecution
story would indicate that a quarrel had arisen6
between the Accused No.1 and PW1, due to which a
complaint to the police was made by PW1, which
further aggravated the enmity. The appellants are
alleged to have come to the shop of the Complainant,
when he was alone, armed with one knife each and
attempted to attack the complainant on his neck but
he managed to escape unhurt. It was submitted that
had the appellants come with the motive to kill both
PW1 and PW2 and were armed with knives, they could
easily have ensured the death of the Complainant.
Learned counsel submitted that in any view of the
matter, there could have been some justification to
proceed against the appellants under Sections 323
and 324 of the IPC but not under Section 307, IPC,
as has been done. It was submitted that the two
victims had sustained only simple injuries, whereas
one victim-PW2 had complained that she had fallen
upon being attacked on her back but she did not
sustain any extraordinary injury and even that was
found to be simple in nature. Likewise, the other7
victim PW1 sustained abrasion injuries on his right
shoulder and left thumb which are simple in nature.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT-STATE/POLICE:
7. Learned counsel for the State submitted that
the appellants being armed with knives (one each)
clearly indicates that they intended to kill and it
was only due to providence that their lives were
saved.
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
8. Section 307, IPC reads as under:
‘307. Attempt to murder.—Whoever does
any act with such intention or
knowledge, and under such
circumstances that, if he by that act
caused death, he would be guilty of
murder, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine; and
if hurt is caused to any person by
such act, the offender shall be liable
either to imprisonment for life, or to
such punishment as is hereinbefore
mentioned.
Attempts by life convicts.—When any
person offending under this section is8
under sentence of imprisonment for
life, he may, if hurt is caused, be
punished with death.
Illustrations
(a) A shoots at Z with intention to
kill him, under such circumstances
that, if death ensued, A would be
guilty of murder. A is liable to
punishment under this section.
(b) A, with the intention of causing
the death of a child of tender years,
exposes it in a desert place. A has
committed the offence defined by this
section, though the death of the child
does not ensue.
(c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a
gun and loads it. A has not yet
committed the offence. A fires the gun
at Z. He has committed the offence
defined in this section, and, if by
such firing he wounds Z, he is liable
to the punishment provided by the
latter part of the first paragraph of
this section.
(d) A, intending to murder Z, by
poison, purchases poison and mixes the
same with food which remains in A's
keeping; A has not yet committed the
offence in this section. A places the
food on Z's table or delivers it to
Z's servants to place it on Z's table.
A has committed the offence defined in
this section.’
9. In State of Madhya Pradesh v Saleem, (2005) 5
SCC 554, the Court held that to sustain a conviction
under Section 307, IPC, it was not necessary that a9
bodily injury capable of resulting in death should
have been inflicted. As such, non-conviction under
Section 307, IPC on the premise only that simple
injury was inflicted does not follow as a matter of
course. In the same judgment, it was pointed out
that ‘…The court has to see whether the act,
irrespective of its result, was done with the
intention or knowledge and under circumstances
mentioned in the section.’ The position that because
a fatal injury was not sustained alone does not
dislodge Section 307, IPC conviction has been
reiterated in Jage Ram v State of Haryana, (2015) 11
SCC 366 and State of Madhya Pradesh v Kanha, (2019)
3 SCC 605. Yet, in Jage Ram (supra) and Kanha
(supra), it was observed that while grievous or
life-threatening injury was not necessary to
maintain a conviction under Section 307, IPC, ‘The
intention of the accused can be ascertained from the
actual injury, if any, as well as from surrounding
circumstances. Among other things, the nature of the10
weapon used and the severity of the blows inflicted
can be considered to infer intent.’1
10. Having considered the facts and circumstances
of the case and submissions of learned counsel for
the parties, this Court is convinced that the
Impugned Judgment of the High Court requires to be
interfered with. Admittedly, there is no allegation
of repeated or severe blows having been inflicted.
Even the injuries on PW1 and PW2 have been found to
be simple in nature, which is an additional point in
the appellants’ favour.
11. We are further inclined to accept the
submissions of the learned counsel for the
appellants that from the materials on record, only
offences under Sections 3232 and 3243 of the IPC can
1 Para 13 of Kanha (supra).
2 ‘323. Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt.—Whoever, except in the case provided for by Section 334, voluntarily
causes hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.’
3 ‘324. Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means.—Whoever, except in the case provided for by Section 334,
voluntarily causes hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as a
weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any
corrosive substance, or by means of any explosive substance or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to the
human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.’11
be made out. As such, the conviction under Section
307, IPC is unsustainable.
12. In the background of the discussions made
hereinabove and on taking an overall view, the
Impugned Judgment is varied only to the extent that
the conviction of the appellants stands modified to
that under Sections 323 and 324 of the IPC and the
sentence imposed is also reduced to the period
already undergone. The fine imposed is maintained.
The appellants stand discharged of the liabilities
of their bail bonds, if any.
13. The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
........................J.
[VIKRAM NATH]
.........................J.
[AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 28, 2023