2. Learned counsel for the appellant-State submitted that the manner of
disposal of the Government appeal needs much to be desired. Trial court
did not even record any finding that the prosecutrix was a consenting party
to the sexual intercourse. It went on some hypothetical questions regarding
alleged delay in lodging FIR. The trial court concluded that since the girl
was more than 16 years of age consent had to be presumed. The High Court
concurred with the view and disposed of the appeal which is as follows:
“Heard learned A.G.A. and perused the judgment
of the trial court. The age of the girl was found to be
above 16 years and further finding is that from the
circumstances appearing in the case the possibility of
the prosecutrix being a consenting party was not ruled
out. The reasons in support of order of acquittal are
plausible and cogent. No sufficient ground is made out
for interference in the order of acquittal.
Leave to appeal is refused.”
3. The approach of the trial court and the High Court is clearly
unsustainable. Merely because the victim was more than 16 years of age as
held by the trial court that cannot be a ground to hold that she was
consenting party. No evidence was led to show such consent. Apart from
that normal rule regarding the duty of the prosecution to explain the delay in
lodging FIR and the lack of prejudice and/or prejudice caused because of
2such delayed lodging of FIR does not per se apply to cases of rape. This has
been the consistent view of this court. The High Court was, therefore,
clearly wrong in disposing of the appeal in such cryptic manner. In the
circumstances of the case, we set aside the order of the High Court and
remit the matter to it for fresh hearing so that it can consider the matter and
hear in detail and dispose of the same by a reasoned judgment. Whatever
has been expressed by us supra is only for the purpose of coming to the
conclusion that the manner of disposal of the appeal is not proper.
4. The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.
……………………………………J.
(Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)
……………………………………J.
(C.K. THAKKER)
……………………………………J.
(D.K. JAIN)
New Delhi:
November 7, 2008
3