REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2184 OF 2014
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.5192 of 2014]
State of Rajasthan ... Appellant
Vs.
Mohammad Muslim Tagala … Respondent
JUDGMENT
(SMT.) RANJANA PRAKASH DESAI, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. The respondent was tried along with two others viz.
Sabena and Mohd. Daud by the Additional District &
Sessions Judge (Fast Track), Sikkar, Rajasthan in Sessions
Case No.24 of 2007 for offences punishable under Sections
363, 366, 376, 307 read with Section 109 of the Indian Penal
Code (“the IPC”). Learned Sessions Judge, Sikkar by
judgment and order dated 11/6/2008 acquitted Sabena and
Page 12
Mohd. Daud, of all the charges. The respondent was
convicted for offence punishable under Section 363 of the IPC
and sentenced to undergo RI for three years and to pay fine of
Rs.1,000/-, in default, to undergo SI for six months. He was
also convicted under Section 366A of the IPC and sentenced to
suffer RI for five years and to pay a fine of Rs.2,000/-, in
default, to undergo SI for six months. He was also convicted
for offence punishable under Section 376 of the IPC and
sentenced to undergo RI for seven years and to pay fine of
Rs.5,000/-, in default, to undergo SI for six months. The
substantive sentences were ordered to run concurrently.
3. Being aggrieved by the said judgment and order, the
respondent filed appeal in the Rajasthan High Court. It is
noticed from the impugned order that in the High Court,
counsel for the respondent did not argue the case on merits.
He only requested the Court that the concerned authorities
may be directed to give benefit of Section 433 of the Criminal
Procedure Code (“the Code”) to the respondent. Learned
Public Prosecutor appearing for the State of Rajasthan did not
Page 23
oppose the said prayer and this fact was recorded by the High
Court in the impugned order. The High Court then gave a
direction to the concerned authorities to give the appellant
benefit of Section 433 of the Code and disposed of the appeal.
The relevant portion of the order could be quoted:
“Having heard the learned counsel for the parties
and carefully perused the relevant material made
available to me including the impugned judgment,
the concerned authorities are directed to give the
benefit of Section 433 Cr.P.C. to the accused
appellant in accordance with law.”
4. Being aggrieved by this order, the State of Rajasthan has
filed the present appeal.
5. On 8/5/2014, this Court asked learned counsel for the
State of Rajasthan whether the Public Prosecutor has really
not opposed the request made by the respondent’s counsel
that the concerned authorities be directed to give the benefit of
Section 433 of the Code to the respondent. Counsel made a
statement that the Public Prosecutor had not made such a
statement in the High Court. We, therefore, directed that an
Page 34
affidavit to that effect be filed. The concerned Public
Prosecutor has, however, not filed any affidavit.
6. As directed by this Court, the respondent has been
served through ASI Prem Singh, P.O. Kotwali, Sikkar,
Rajasthan. ASI Prem Singh has filed an affidavit to that effect.
Proof of service of notice is annexed to the said affidavit.
Despite service, the respondent has chosen not to appear in
person or through a pleader. Hence, on 17/9/2014, this
Court directed the Registry of this Court to appoint a lawyer
for the respondent. Accordingly, Mr. John Mathew, Advocate,
has been appointed by the Registry of this Court and he has
ably assisted us today.
7. The appellant-State has challenged the impugned order
on the ground that the offence committed by the respondent
was grave and, therefore, the High Court erred in giving a
direction to the authorities to give benefit of Section 433 of the
Code to the respondent. It is, however, not stated in the
appeal memo that the Public Prosecutor did not concede in the
Page 45
High Court. This statement was made only in this Court. It
must also be noted, at the outset, that the respondent has
undergone seven years’ imprisonment and has been released
from custody. This statement has been made by counsel for
the appellant-State and, in support of his submission, he has
tendered in this Court a letter addressed by the
Superintendent of Bikaner Central Jail to the Additional
Superintendent of Police, Sikkar. Counsel submitted that
though the High Court gave a direction to the concerned
authorities to give the respondent benefit of commutation of
sentence under Section 433 of the Code, the said benefit was
not given. Since the respondent has been released from jail
after serving the sentence imposed on him and no steps were
taken by the concerned authorities pursuant to the direction
given by the High Court, to give the respondent benefit under
Section 433 of the Code, the present appeal has actually
become infructuous. However, it is necessary to make certain
observations before disposing of this appeal as infructuous.
Page 56
8. Section 433 of the Code pertains to power of the
appropriate Government to commute the sentence without the
consent of the person sentenced. It reads thus:
“433. Power to commute sentence. - The
appropriate Government may, without the consent of
the person sentenced, commute-
(a) a sentence of death, for any other
punishment provided by the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860);
(b) a sentence of imprisonment for life, for
imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years
or for fine;
(c) a sentence of rigorous imprisonment, for
simple imprisonment for any term to which that
person might have been sentenced, or for fine;
(d) a sentence of simple imprisonment, for
fine.”
9. When the appropriate Government commutes the
sentence, it does so in exercise of its sovereign powers.
The court cannot direct the appropriate Government to
exercise its sovereign powers. The Court can merely give a
direction to the appropriate Government to consider the case
Page 67
for commutation of sentence and nothing more. This legal
position is no more res integra.
10. In Delhi Administration (now NCT of Delhi) v.
Manohar Lal1, this Court stated that the exercise of power
under Section 433 of the Code was an executive discretion. In
State of Punjab v. Kesar Singh2, this Court clarified the
position as under:
“The mandate of Section 433 CrPC enables the
Government in an appropriate case to commute the
sentence of a convict and to prematurely order his
release before expiry of the sentence as imposed by
the courts. … That apart, even if the High Court could
give such a direction, it could only direct
consideration of the case of premature release by the
Government and could not have ordered the
premature release of the respondent itself. The right
to exercise the power under Section 433 CrPC vests
in the Government and has to be exercised by the
Government in accordance with the rules and
established principles. The impugned order of the
High Court cannot, therefore, be sustained and is
hereby set aside.”
1 (2002) 7 SCC 222
2 (1996) 5 SCC 495
Page 78
11. In State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi) v. Prem Raj3, this
Court referred to relevant portion of 41st Report of the Law
Commission and observed that the powers of commutation
exclusively vest with the appropriate Government. At the
same time, these powers have to be exercised by the
Government reasonably and rationally keeping in view the
reasons germane and relevant for the purpose of law,
mitigating circumstances and/or commiserative facts
necessitating the commutation and factors like interest of the
society and public interest.
12. The upshot of this discussion is that the High Court
erred in giving a direction to the State Government to
commute the sentence of the respondent. It could have only
directed the State Government to consider the respondent’s
case for commutation of sentence. In any case, assuming the
High Court could have given such a direction, since it was
dealing with a conviction under Section 376 of the IPC, it
should have noted the extra-ordinary circumstances, if any,
3 (2003) 7 SCC 121
Page 89
which persuaded it to give such a direction. Unfortunately,
the High Court merely noted the request made by the counsel
for the respondent and concession made by the State counsel.
If the High Court felt that the prosecution case was extremely
weak and the respondent deserved to be acquitted, it should
have discussed the evidence and acquitted him. But, it could
not have adopted such a course.
13. Before closing, we must express our extreme displeasure
about the manner in which the Public Prosecutor made a
concession in the High Court. Firstly, the offence is grave and
in such grave offence, the Public Prosecutor ought not to have
made a concession that the court should direct the
Government to commute the sentence. Besides, the Public
Prosecutor made a concession without examining the legal
position. The Public Prosecutor plays a very important role in
a criminal case. It is distressing to note that in such a serious
case, the Public Prosecutor should have shown such a casual
approach. Since the appeal has become infructuous, we do not
want to precipitate the matter further. We only hope that
Page 910
these observations of ours are taken note of by all concerned.
The appeal is disposed of as infructuous.
..………………………….J.
[Ranjana Prakash Desai]
………………………….J.
[N.V. Ramana]
New Delhi
October 13, 2014.
Page 10