http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 10
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 909 of 1997
PETITIONER:
T. Shankar Prasad
RESPONDENT:
State of Andhra Pradesh
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 12/01/2004
BENCH:
DORAISWAMY RAJU & ARIJIT PASAYAT
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
With Crl. A. No. 910/1997
ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
These two appeals are directed against the common
judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court which upheld the
conviction of the appellants under Sections 7, 11, and
13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 (in short the ’Act’) and Section 120B
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short the ’IPC’).
Appellants T. Shankar Prasad (in Crl. A. No.909/1997)
and Ghaiz Basha (in Crl. A.No.910/97)(also described as A1
and A2) were working as Assistant Commercial Tax Officer and
Junior Assistant respectively in the office of the
Commercial Tax Department of Kanigiri, Prakasam District.
Way bills were issued to the traders by the department for
their day to day transactions and taxable goods to be
transported were required to be covered by the way bills
issued by the department. Complainant (PW-1) was a dealer in
grocery articles and under the relevant sales tax statutes,
a registered dealer. He applied for way bills. On 25.4.1992
he requested the accused T. Shankar Prasad to get the way
bills duly stamped and signed by him. The officer demanded
Rs.400/- as bribe in the presence of other accused. When the
complainant expressed his inability to pay the amount, the
demand of the bribe was reduced to Rs.300/-. Complainant
agreed to pay the amount within two to three days. Since he
was not interested to pay the bribe, he reported the matter
to the Anti Corruption Bureau officials on 28.4.1992. The
case was registered by the officials on the said date and
mediators were secured and trap was arranged. Since on that
day accused T. Shankar Prasad was not available in the
office, the trap could not be laid. On the next date again
the mediators and the members of the trap party arranged the
trap and accordingly the complainant approached the accused
T. Shankar Prasad who directed him to pay the amount to
other accused Ghaiz Basha. When the latter received the
bribe amount from the complainant the trap party caught hold
of both the officers and the amount was recovered from the
possession of second accused and the sodium carbonate
solution test conducted proved positive. After furnishing
documents to the accused persons and hearing on the question
of framing charges, charges were framed. The accused persons
pleaded innocence and claimed to be tried. Eight witnesses
were examined and several documents were marked. Thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 10
complainant was examined as PW-1. PW-2 was the Assistant
Audit Officer who deposed about the whole scenario before
the search was conducted. The significance of the test by
the chemicals and their reactions was explained to him.
Currency notes were applied with phenolphthalein powder. The
powder was not visible on the currency notes. The DSP who
was monitoring the trap instructed PW-1 not to touch the
cash and only pay to the accused on demand. He was asked to
give signal after bribe amount was accepted, by waving a
handkerchief. PW-4 was an Assistant Director of Veterinary
Hospital who acted as a mediator. He also described in
detail about the trap operations. PW-5 was a Senior
Assistant in the Commercial Tax office who deposed about
part of the transaction relating to issuance of way bills
forms with reference to the official records. PW-7 was DSP
who monitored the operations. PW-8 was the Inspector who had
received the complaint from PW-1. The accused persons were
examined under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (in short the ’Code’). They denied about the
demand and acceptance of bribe, and took the stand that
false case had been foisted due to enmity. One witness was
examined on behalf of the accused T. Shankar Prasad. Said
witness deposed about the registration of a relative of the
complainant and his business activities.
Stand of the accused T. Shankar Prasad was that no
money was recovered from his possession. The other accused
Ghaiz Basha took the plea that there was no material to show
that he had demanded any bribe. He further stated that he
had accepted the amount to be deposited as advance tax and
when he was about to write the challan, the Anti Corruption
Bureau officials caught hold of him and implicated him
falsely.
The trial Court noticed that PW-1 had partially resiled
from the statement made by him during investigation. He
made half-hearted attempt to support the accused Ghaiz
Basha. The trial Court found them guilty under Sections 7
and 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the Act. It
sentenced each of the accused to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for two years for the offence relatable to
Section 7 and imposed similar sentence for the other offence
i.e. under Section 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the
Act. Fine of Rs.1,000/- each was also imposed with default
stipulation. Appeals filed by the accused persons before the
Andhra Pradesh High Court were dismissed by the impugned
judgment except modification of sentence. The sentence was
reduced to 6 months for the offence relatable to Section 7,
and one year for the offence relatable to Section 13(1)(d)
read with Section 13(2) of the Act. It did not find any
substance in the plea that the evidence of PW-1 did not
implicate the accused persons and since no money was
recovered from the accused T. Shankar Prasad he was not
guilty, and that there was no material about demand of bribe
by the other accused. The pleas were re-iterated in the
appeals before us.
It was submitted that since the complainant himself did
not support the prosecution version fully, it was
impermissible to convict the accused persons. The statutory
presumption available under Section 7 read with Section 20
of the Act was not to be utilized against the accused
person. The effect of an affidavit by the complainant was
lost sight of. He did not implicate the accused persons
directly. Since there was no recovery from A-1, there was nohttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 10
material to connect him with the tainted money and he should
not have been held guilty. As A-2 was not in the same room
where A-1 was sitting, it has not been established as to
what was his role. There was no conspiracy. A-2 did not know
that the amount that was offered was bribe. Great stress has
been laid by the learned counsel for the appellants on the
evidence of PW-1 to show that he has not categorically
implicated the accused persons. Since the accused persons
were acquitted of the charge under Section 120B IPC, they
are entitled to acquittal for the offence relatable to the
Act. Such a plea was specifically rejected by this Court in
Madan Lal v. The State of Punjab (AIR 1967 SC 1590). It was
held that if the charge of conspiracy to commit criminal
breach of trust is followed by a substantive charge of
criminal breach of trust in pursuance of such conspiracy,
the Court can convict the accused under the second charge
even if conspiracy was not established. In any event, no
prejudice is caused to the accused persons where there was a
substantive charge of criminal breach of trust.
Reliance was placed on V.K. Sharma v. State (Delhi
Admn. (1975 (1) SCC 784), Sita Ram v. The State of Rajasthan
(1975 (2) SCC 227) and Suraj Mal v. State (Delhi Admn.)
(1979(4) SCC 725) to contend that mere recovery in the
absence of any evidence to show payment of money was not
sufficient. Mere recovery without proof of its payment by or
on behalf of the complainant would not bring in application
of Section 4 of the Act.
Learned counsel for the State on the other hand
supported the conviction as done by the trial Court. With
reference to the evidence of official witnesses and the
documents brought on record it was submitted that they have
no axe to grind with the accused, are independent witnesses
and the Courts below have rightly relied on the evidence.
For appreciating rival stands it would be proper to
quote Section 4(1) of the Act, which reads as follows:
"4.(1) Presumption where public
servant accepts gratification other than
legal remuneration.-(1) Where in any trial
or an offence punishable under Section 161
or Section 165 of the IPC or of an offence
referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of Section 5 of this Act
punishable under sub-section (2) thereof, it
is proved that an accused person has
accepted or obtained, or has agreed to
accept or attempted to obtain, for himself
or for any other person any gratification
(other than legal remuneration) or any
valuable thing from any person, it shall be
presumed unless the contrary is proved that
he accepted or obtained, or agreed to accept
or attempted to obtain, that gratification
or that valuable thing, as the case may be,
as a motive or reward such as is mentioned
in the said Section 161, or, as the case may
be, without consideration or for a
consideration which he knows to be
inadequate."
Before proceeding further, we may point out that the
expressions "may presume" and "shall presume" are definedhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 10
in Section 4 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in short the
’Evidence Act’). The presumptions falling under the former
category are compendiously known as "factual presumptions"
or "discretionary presumptions" and those falling under
the latter as "legal presumptions" or "compulsory
presumptions". When the expression "shall be presumed" is
employed in Section 4(1) of the Act, it must have the same
import of compulsion.
When the sub-section deals with legal presumption, it
is to be understood as in terrorem i.e. in tone of a command
that it has to be presumed that the accused accepted the
gratification as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing
to do any official act etc., if the condition envisaged in
the former part of the section is satisfied. The only
condition for drawing such a legal presumption under Section
4 is that during trial it should be proved that the accused
has accepted or agreed to accept any gratification. The
Section does not say that the said condition should be
satisfied through direct evidence. Its only requirement is
that it must be proved that the accused has accepted or
agreed to accept gratification. Direct evidence is one of
the modes through which a fact can be proved. But that is
not the only mode envisaged in the Evidence Act. (See M.
Narsinga Rao v. State of A.P. (2001 (1) SCC 691).
Proof of the fact depends upon the degree of
probability of its having existed. The standard required for
reaching the supposition is that of a prudent man acting in
any important matter concerning him. Fletcher Moulton L.J.
in Hawkins v. Powells Tillery Steam Coal Co. Ltd. (1911 (1)
KB 988) observed as follows:
"Proof does not mean proof to rigid
mathematical demonstration, because that is
impossible; it must mean such evidence as
would induce a reasonable man to come to a
particular conclusion".
The said observation has stood the test of time and can
now be followed as the standard of proof. In reaching the
conclusion the Court can use the process of inferences to be
drawn from facts produced or proved. Such inferences are
akin to presumptions in law. Law gives absolute discretion
to the Court to presume the existence of any fact which it
thinks likely to have happened. In that process the Court
may have regard to common course of natural events, human
conduct, public or private business vis-‘-vis the facts of
the particular case. The discretion is clearly envisaged in
Section 114 of the Evidence Act.
Presumption is an inference of a certain fact drawn
from other proved facts. While inferring the existence of a
fact from another, the Court is only applying a process of
intelligent reasoning which the mind of a prudent man would
do under similar circumstances. Presumption is not the final
conclusion to be drawn from other facts. But it could as
well be final if it remains undisturbed later. Presumption
in law of evidence is a rule indicating the stage of
shifting the burden of proof. From a certain fact or facts
the Court can draw an inference and that would remain until
such inference is either disproved or dispelled.
For the purpose of reaching one conclusion the Court
can rely on a factual presumption. Unless the presumption ishttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 10
disproved or dispelled or rebutted the Court can treat the
presumption as tantamounting to proof. However, as a caution
of prudence we have to observe that it may be unsafe to use
that presumption to draw yet another discretionary
presumption unless there is a statutory compulsion. This
Court has indicated so in Suresh Budharmal Kalani v. State
of Maharashtra (1998 (7) SCC 337) "A presumption can be
drawn only from facts \026 and not from other presumptions \026 by
a process of probable and logical reasoning".
Illustration (a) to Section 114 of the Evidence Act
says that the Court may presume that "a man who is in the
possession of stolen goods soon after the theft is either
the thief or has received the goods knowing them to be
stolen, unless he can account for his possession". That
illustration can profitably be used in the present context
as well when prosecution brought reliable materials that
there was recovery of money from the accused. In fact the
receipt and recovery is accepted. The other factor is the
acceptability of the plea of loan, which the High Court
itself has not held cogent or credible.
We may note that a three-Judge Bench in Raghubir Singh
v. State of Punjab (1974 (4) SCC 560) held that the very
fact that the accused was in possession of the marked
currency notes against an allegation that he demanded and
received the amount is "res ipsa loquitur".
In Hazari Lal v. State (Delhi Admn.) (1980 (2) SCC 390)
it was observed that there is no requirement to prove
passing of money by direct evidence. It may also be proved
by circumstantial evidence. In Madhukar Bhaskarrao Joshi v.
State of Maharashtra (2000 (8) SCC 571) it was observed
thus:
"The premise to be established on the
facts for drawing the presumption is that
there was payment or acceptance of
gratification. Once the said premise is
established the inference to be drawn is
that the said gratification was accepted
"as motive or reward" for doing or
forbearing to do any official act. So the
word "gratification" need not be stretched
to mean reward because reward is the outcome
of the presumption which the court has to
draw on the factual premise that there was
payment of gratification. This will again be
fortified by looking at the collocation of
two expressions adjacent to each other like
"gratification or any valuable thing". If
acceptance of any valuable thing can help to
draw the presumption that it was accepted as
motive or reward for doing or forbearing to
do an official act, the word
"gratification" must be treated in the
context to mean any payment for giving
satisfaction to the public servant who
received it".
It is to be noted that decisions relied upon by the learned
counsel for the accused were considered in Narsinga Rao’s
case (supra) and it was held that the principles had no
application as the findings recorded depend upon the
veracity of the testimony of the witnesses, so far as Surajhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 6 of 10
Mal’s case (supra) is concerned, and the observations in
Sita Ram’s case (supra), were to be confined to the facts of
that case and no legal principle for future application
could be discerned therefrom.
In Black’s Law Dictionary, "gratification" is defined
as "a recompense or reward for services or benefits, given
voluntarily, without solicitation or promise". But in
Oxford Advance Learner’s Dictionary of Current English the
said word is given the meaning "to give pleasure or
satisfaction to". Among the above two descriptions for the
word "gratification" with slightly differing nuances as
between the two, what is more appropriate for the context
has to be found out. The context in which the word is used
in Section 4(1) of the Act is, hence, important.
In Mohmoodkhan Mahboobkhan Pathan v. State of
Maharashtra (1997 (10) SCC 600) this Court has taken the
same meaning for the word "gratification" appearing in
Section 4(1) of the Act. We quote the following
observations:
"7. The primary condition for acting
on the legal presumption under Section 4(1)
of the Act is that the prosecution should
have proved that what the accused received
was gratification. The word ’gratification’
is not defined in the Act. Hence, it must be
understood in its literal meaning. In the
Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of
Current English, the word ’gratification’ is
shown to have the meaning ’to give pleasure
or satisfaction to’. The word
’gratification’ is used in Section 4(1) to
denote acceptance of something to the
pleasure or satisfaction of the recipient."
What is the concept of gratification has been
succinctly stated by this Court in The State of Assam v.
Krishna Rao (1973 (3) SCC 227), in following illuminating
words:
"21.-In our opinion, there is merit in the
appellant’s contention that the High Court
has taken an erroneous view of Section 4 of
the Prevention of Corruption Act. That
section reads:
"4. Presumption where public
servant accepts gratification other
than legal remuneration.-(1) Where
in any trial or an offence
punishable under Section 161 or
Section 165 of the IPC or of an
offence referred to in clause (a)
or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 5 of this Act punishable
under sub-section (2) thereof, it
is proved that an accused person
has accepted or obtained, or has
agreed to accept or attempted to
obtain, for himself or for any
other person any gratification
(other than legal remuneration) orhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 7 of 10
any valuable thing from any person,
it shall be presumed unless the
contrary is proved that he accepted
or obtained, or agreed to accept or
attempted to obtain, that
gratification or that valuable
thing, as the case may be, as a
motive or reward such as is
mentioned in the said Section 161,
or, as the case may be, without
consideration or for a
consideration which he knows to be
inadequate.
(2) Where in any trial of an
offence punishable under Section
165-A of the Indian Penal Code or
under clause (ii) of sub-section
(3) of Section 5 of this Act, it is
proved that any gratification
(other than legal remuneration) or
any valuable thing has been given
or offered to be given or attempted
to be given by an accused person,
it shall be presumed unless the
contrary is proved that he gave or
offered to give or attempted to
give that gratification or that
valuable thing, as the case may be,
as a motive or reward such as is
mentioned in Section 161 IPC or as
the case may be without
consideration or for a
consideration which he knows to be
inadequate.
(3) Notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-sections (1) and
(2) the court may decline to draw
the presumption referred to in
either of the said sub-sections, if
the gratification or thing
aforesaid is, in its opinion, so
trivial that no inference of
corruption may fairly be drawn."
22.-In State of Madras v. A. Vaidiaratha
Iyer (1958 SCR 580) after reproducing the
relevant provisions of Section 4 of the Act
this Court observed that where it is proved
that a gratification has been accepted the
presumption under Section 4 of the Act shall
at once arise. It is a presumption of law
and it is obligatory on the Court to raise
it in every case brought under Section 4. In
the reported case this Court allowed the
appeal of the State of Madras and setting
aside the impugned order of acquittal passed
by the High Court restored that of the
Special Judge convicting the respondent
there. In C.I. Emden v. The State of U.P.
(AIR 1960 SC 548) the appellant who was
working as a local foreman, was found to
have accepted a sum of Rs.375 from a railway
contractor. The appellant’s explanation washttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 8 of 10
that he had borrowed the amount as he was in
need of money for meeting the expenses of
the clothing of his children who were
studying in school. The Special Judge
accepted the evidence of the contractor and
held that the money had been taken as a
bribe, that the defence story was improbable
and untrue, that the presumption under
Section 4 of the Act had to be raised and
that the presumption had not been rebutted
by the appellant and accordingly convicted
him under Section 161 IPC and Section 5 of
the Act. On appeal the High Court held that
on the facts of that case the statutory
presumption under Section 4 had to be
raised, that the explanation offered by the
appellant was improbable and palpably
unreasonable and that the presumption had
not been rebutted, and upheld the
conviction. The appellant contended, on
appeal in this Court, inter alia: (i) that
the presumption under Section 4 could not be
raised merely on proof of acceptance of
money but it had further to be proved that
the money was accepted as a bribe, (ii) that
even if the presumption arose it was
rebutted when the appellant offered a
reasonably probable explanation. This Court,
dealing with the presumption under Section
4, observed that such presumption arose when
it was shown that the accused had received
the stated amount and that the said amount
was not legal remuneration. The word
’gratification in Section 4(1) was to be
given its literal dictionary meaning of
satisfaction or appetite or desire; it could
not be construed to mean money paid by way
of a bribe. The High Court was justified in
raising the presumption against the
appellant as it was admitted that he had
received the money from the contractor and
the amount received was other than legal
remuneration. On the facts the explanation
given by the accused, in agreement with the
opinion of the High Court was held to be
wholly unsatisfactory and unreasonable. In
Dhanvantrai v. State of Maharashtra (AIR
1964 SC 575) it was observed that in order
to raise the presumption under Section 4(1)
of the Act what the prosecution has to prove
is that the accused person has received
’gratification other than legal
remuneration’ and when it is shown that he
has received a certain sum of money which
was not a legal remuneration, then, the
condition prescribed by this section is
satisfied and the presumption thereunder
must be raised. In Jhangan v. State of U.P.
(1968 (3) SCR 766) the above decisions were
approved and it is observed that mere
receipt of money is sufficient to raise the
presumption under Section 4(1) of the Act."
In C.I. Emden v. State of Uttar Pradesh (AIR 1960 SChttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 9 of 10
548) and V.D. Jhangan v. State of Uttar Pradesh (1966 (3)
SCR 736) it was observed that if any money is received and
no convincing, credible and acceptable explanation is
offered by the accused as to how it came to be received by
him, the presumption under Section 4 of the Act is
available. When the receipt is admitted it is for the
accused to prove as to how the presumption is not available
as perforce the presumption arises and becomes operative.
These aspects were highlighted recently in State of
Andhra Pradesh v. V. Vasudev Rao (JT 2003 (9) SC 119).
On a close reading of PW 1’s evidence it appears that
he has not really given a clean chit to the accused persons.
Though a feeble attempt was made to show that he has not
implicated A-2, in fact that is really not of significance
when his evidence is read along with the evidence of other
witnesses. The evidence clearly shows that A-1 directed the
money to be paid to A-2. The stand of accused about nature
of receipt of the money is also not consistent. The stand
was taken as if the money was received by A-2 for the
payment of the advance tax. The documents brought on record
go to show that there was no necessity for paying any
advance tax. In fact the official records indicate that the
tax due was fully paid. Therefore, the plea that the amount
was paid as advance tax is clearly without substance.
The fact that PW-1 did not stick to his statement made
during investigation does not totally obliterate his
evidence. Even in criminal prosecution when a witness is
cross-examined and contradicted with the leave of Court by
the party calling him, his evidence cannot as a matter of
law be treated as washed off record altogether. It is for
the Judge of fact to consider in each case whether as a
result of such cross examination and contradiction, the
witness stands thoroughly discredited or can still be
believed in regard to a part of his testimony. If the Judge
finds that in the process the credit of the witness has not
been completely shaken he may after reading and considering
the evidence of the said witness, accept in the light of
other evidence on record that part of his testimony which he
found to be creditworthy and act upon it. As noted above,
PW-1 did not totally resile from his earlier statement.
There was only a half-hearted attempt to partially shield A-
2. PW-1 has categorically stated that he had paid the money
to A-2 as directed by A-1. As noted above, the plea of A-2
that he had accepted the money as advance tax has been
rightly discarded being contrary to official records.
Evidence of PW-2 with regard to proceedings on 28.4.1992 has
been clearly established. Evidence of PW-4 the mediator is
corroborated by the evidence of PWs 1, 3, 7 and 8. His
report was marked as Ext P.13. The same along with the other
evidence clearly establish the accusations against both the
accused. When money was recovered from the pocket of one of
the accused persons a presumption under Section 7 of the Act
is obligatory. It is a presumption of law and cast an
obligation on Court to operate it in every case brought in
Section 7. The presumption is a rebuttable presumption and
it is by proof and not by explanation which may seem to be
plausible. The evidence of PWs 4, 5, 7 and 8 read with the
evidence of PW-1 established recovery of money from A-2. A
belated and stale explanation was offered by A-2 that the
money was paid towards tax. This plea was rightly discarded
as there was no tax due and on the contrary the complainant
was entitled to some refund. An overall consideration of thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 10 of 10
materials sufficiently substantiate, in the case on hand the
prevalence of a system and methodology cleverly adopted by
the accused that the demand will be specified when both the
accused were present and thereafter as and when the A-1 puts
his signature the party has to meet A-2, at his seat for
fixing the seal and making entry in the Register to make the
process complete only after collecting the amount already
specified by A-1 in A-2’s presence. The involvement of both
of them in a well planned and cleverly managed device to
systematically collect money stood sufficiently established
on the evidence let in by prosecution. Further A-2 did not
offer his explanation immediately after the recovery of
money. A similar plea of receiving money as advance tax was
rejected and affirmed by this Court in A. Abdul Kaffar v.
State of Kerala (2003 (8) Supreme 804). It was noted that
such a stand was not taken at the first available
opportunity, and the defence was not genuine. In State of
U.P. v. Dr. G.K.Ghosh (AIR 1984 SC 1453) it was observed
that in case of an offence of demanding and accepting
illegal gratification, depending on the circumstances of the
case, the Court may feel safe in accepting the prosecution
version on the basis of the oral evidence of the complainant
and the official witnesses even if the trap witnesses turn
hostile or are found not to be independent. When besides
such evidence, there is circumstantial evidence which is
consistent with the guilt of the accused and not consistent
with his innocence, there should be no difficulty in
upholding the conviction.
When the factual position is examined in the background
of legal principles culled out from various decisions of
this Court, the inevitable conclusion is that the High
Court’s judgment is irreversible.
Above being the position, the appeals being without
merit are dismissed.