were found guilty of offences punishable under Sections 8 and 21 of the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (in short the ‘Act’).
3. Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:
On 1st July, 1995 at about 4.15 a.m. Army Patrolling Party, on the
other side of Village, Hamirpur Sidhar near DCB end point, noticed
suspicious movement of some infiltrators who on being challenged
abandoned some suspicious materials and escaped under the cover of
darkness. On receipt of this information, Customs Staff camping at the other
side of the village rushed to the spot. Both the army authorities and Custom
staff, found some suspicious materials on spot in two salwars and a plastic
bag left abandoned in the field near DCB end point. They called two panchs
from the area and the three packages found lying abandoned in the field
were opened in their presence from which 56 packets of light brown
powder, each weighing one kg. were recovered and seized by the Custom
staff under Section 110 of the Customs Act, 1962 (in short ‘Customs Act’).
Apart from that, one pair of Chappal and two pairs of shoes total three
footwear were also recovered from the spot. Recovered material appeared to
be some Narcotic Drug in packets and in yellow brownish paper kept in
polythene bags wrapped in cotton cloth bearing stamp marking in Urdu
2Khadi No.1, No.858 and 223. It was subjected to drug test by the Custom
Staff with U.N. Drug test kit and it was confirmed that the material was
contraband Morphine Heroin or its derivative. Recovery-cum-seizure memo
of the Heroin was prepared and panchnama was drawn on spot. The samples
were taken out of the seized material and sent for chemical analysis to FSL,
Jammu who in its report revealed that Diactyl Morphine ‘Heroin was found
present in the samples taken out of the recovered light brown powder. The
identity of infiltrators was established through the secret information report
recorded prior to the seizure. It was disclosed that the names of two
suspects were Hakikat Singh and Yashpal. Recovery of three packages and
three pairs of foot wearings were made from the spot. The recovery of three
packages and three pairs of foot wearing indicated that third person was also
accompanying the two infiltrators.
Yash Pal was summoned by Superintendent, Customs under Section
108 of the Customs Act. He appeared before him and made confessional
statement on 27.7.1995 involving himself in smuggling of Heroin and was
thereupon arrested. In his voluntary statement of confession, he disclosed
the names of two accomplices, namely, Hakikat Singh and Paramjeet Singh
and narrated the sequence of events of fetching fifty six Kg. Heroin at Indo
3Pak border and its carriage upto village Hamirpur Sidhar and on its
detection by the Army Patrol, it led to his escape from the scene after
abandoning the material and three pairs of foot wear. He also confessed that
he was being paid Ra.2000/- by Hakikat Singh @ Kiti and Paramjit Singh
alias Pamma for carriage of contraband articles. Similarly, on 23rd August,
1995 accused Hakikat Singh also came to be intercepted by the Custom
staff, Jammu and he made voluntary statement to the same effect. He
confessed that he was being paid Rs.10,000/- for carriage of the material.
Paramjit Singh did not appear before the Custom authorities. Evidence was
collected and complaint was presented before Sessions Judge (Special
Judge) by the Inspector of Customs. Accused pleaded not guilty to the
charge and were put to trial. The third accused was proceeded against
separately. The learned trial Court after appreciating the evidence led by the
parties came to the conclusion that accused have committed the offences
punishable under Sections 8 and 21 of the Act and recorded conviction and
sentence.
4. The trial Court as noted above found the accused respondents guilty
and recorded the conviction and imposed sentence.
45. In appeal two stands were taken. First related to non-compliance of
Section 41(2) of the Act and the other related to not putting the alleged
incriminating materials to the accused while the statement was recorded
under Section 342 of the old Code of Criminal Procedure (in short ‘the Old
Code’) or Section 313 of the new Code of Criminal Procedure (in short ‘the
New Code’). The High Court found substance in the second plea and
directed acquittal.
6. In support of the appeal learned counsel for the appellant submitted
that though minor errors and omissions in bringing to the notice of the
accused the incriminating materials are not vulnerable, in this case a very
specific plea relating to the foundation of the prosecution case and the
evidence on which the reliance was placed was put to the accused. That
being so, the High Court is in error by directing acquittal.
7. Stand of the learned counsel for the appellant further that the
approach was hyper-technical and was not in line with the true intent of
Section 342 or Section 313 of the Code.
58. Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand supported the
judgment.
9. It is to be noted that the High Court did not accept the stand relating
to non compliance of Section 41(2) of the Act. It only interfered on the
ground that the relevant incriminatory materials were not put to the accused
when they were being examined.
10. Section 313 Cr.P.C. reads as follows:
“313. Power to examine the accused.—(1) In every inquiry or
trial, for the purpose of enabling the accused personally to
explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against
him, the court—
(a) may at any stage, without previously warning the accused,
put such questions to him as the court considers necessary;
(b) shall, after the witnesses for the prosecution have been
examined and before he is called on for his defence, question
him generally on the case:
Provided that in a summons case, where the court has
dispensed with the personal attendance of the accused, it may
also dispense with his examination under clause (b).
(2) No oath shall be administered to the accused when he is
examined under sub-section (1).
(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment
by refusing to answer such questions, or by giving false
answers to them.
6(4) The answers given by the accused may be taken into
consideration in such inquiry or trial, and put in evidence for or
against him in any other inquiry into, or trial for, any other
offence which such answers may tend to show he has
committed.”
11. The forerunner of the said provision in the Old Code was Section 342
therein. It was worded thus:
“342. (1) For the purpose of enabling the accused to explain
any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him, the
court may, at any stage of any inquiry or trial, without
previously warning the accused, put such questions to him as
the court considers necessary, and shall, for the purpose
aforesaid, question him generally on the case after the
witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before
he is called on for his defence.
(2) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment
by refusing to answer such questions, or by giving false
answers to them; but the court and the jury (if any) may draw
such inference from such refusal or answers as it thinks just.
(3) The answers given by the accused may be taken into
consideration in such inquiry or trial, and put in evidence for or
against him in any other inquiry into, or trial for, any other
offence which such answers may tend to show he has
committed.
(4) No oath shall be administered to the accused when he is
examined under sub-section (1).”
712. Dealing with the position as the section remained in the original form
under the Old Code, a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Hate Singh
Bhagat Singh v. State of Madhya Bharat (AIR 1953 SC 468) that:
“The statements of the accused recorded by the
Committing Magistrate and the Sessions Judge are
intended in India to take the place of what in England
and in America he would be free to state in his own way
in the witness-box. They have to be received in evidence
and treated as evidence and be duly considered at the
trial.”
13. Parliament, thereafter, introduced Section 342-A in the Old Code
(which corresponds to Section 315 of the present Code) by which
permission is given to an accused to offer himself to be examined as a
witness if he so chose.
14. In Bibhuti Bhusan Das Gupta’s case (supra) another three-Judge
Bench dealing with the combined operation of Sections 342 and 342-A of
the Old Code made the following observations:
“Under Section 342-A only the accused can give
evidence in person and his pleader’s evidence cannot be
treated as his. The answers of the accused under Section
342 is intended to be a substitute for the evidence which
8he can give as a witness under Section 342-A. The
privilege and the duty of answering questions under
Section 342 cannot be delegated to a pleader. No doubt
the form of the summons show that the pleader may
answer the charges against the accused, but in so
answering the charges, he cannot do what only the
accused can do personally. The pleader may be permitted
to represent the accused while the prosecution evidence
is being taken. But at the close of the prosecution
evidence the accused must be questioned and his pleader
cannot be examined in his place.”
15. The Law Commission in its 41st Report considered the aforesaid
decisions and also various other points of view highlighted by legal men
and then made the report after reaching the conclusion that:
(i) in summons cases where the personal attendance of
the accused has been dispensed with, either under
Section 205 or under Section 540-A, the court should
have a power to dispense with his examination; and
(ii) in other cases, even where his personal attendance
has been dispensed with, the accused should be
examined personally.
16. The said recommendation has been followed up by Parliament and
Section 313 of the Code, as is presently worded, is the result of it. It would
appear prima facie that the court has discretion to dispense with the physical
presence of an accused during such questioning only in summons cases and
in all other cases it is incumbent on the court to question the accused
personally after closing prosecution evidence. Nonetheless, the Law
9Commission was conscious that the rule may have to be relaxed eventually,
particularly when there is improvement in literacy and legal-aid facilities in
the country. This thinking can be discerned from the following suggestion
made by the Law Commission in the same report:
“We have, after considering the various aspects of the
matter as summarised above, come to the conclusion that
Section 342 should not be deleted. In our opinion, the
stage has not yet come for it being removed from the
statute-book. With further increase in literacy and with
better facilities for legal aid, it may be possible to take
that step in the future.”
17. The position has to be considered in the present set-up, particularly
after the lapse of more than a quarter of a century through which period
revolutionary changes in the technology of communication and transmission
have taken place, thanks to the advent of computerisation. There is marked
improvement in the facilities for legal aid in the country during the
preceding twenty-five years. Hence a fresh look can be made now. We are
mindful of the fact that a two-Judge Bench in Usha K. Pillai (1993 (3) SCC
208) has found that the examination of an accused personally can be
dispensed with only in summons case. Their Lordships were considering a
case where the offence involved was Section 363 IPC. The two-Judge
Bench held thus: (SCC pp.212-13, para 4)
10“A warrant case is defined as one relating to an offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term exceeding two years. Since an
offence under Section 363 IPC is punishable with
imprisonment for a term exceeding two years it is a
warrant case and not a summons case. Therefore, even in
cases where the court has dispensed with the personal
attendance of the accused under Section 205(1) or
Section 317 of the Code, the court cannot dispense with
the examination of the accused under clause (b) of
Section 313 of the Code because such examination is
mandatory.”
18. Contextually we cannot bypass the decision of a three-Judge Bench
of this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. S tate of Maharashtra (1973 (2)
SCC 793) as the Bench has widened the sweep of the provision concerning
examination of the accused after closing prosecution evidence. Learned
Judges in that case were considering the fallout of omission to put to the
accused a question on a vital circumstance appearing against him in the
prosecution evidence. The three-Judge Bench made the following
observations therein: (SCC p. 806, para 16)
“It is trite law, nevertheless fundamental, that the
prisoner’s attention should be drawn to every inculpatory
material so as to enable him to explain it. This is the
basic fairness of a criminal trial and failures in this area
may gravely imperil the validity of the trial itself, if
consequential miscarriage of justice has flowed.
However, where such an omission has occurred it does
not ipso facto vitiate the proceedings and prejudice
occasioned by such defect must be established by the
accused. In the event of evidentiary material not being
put to the accused, the court must ordinarily eschew such
11material from consideration. It is also open to the
appellate court to call upon the counsel for the accused
to show what explanation the accused has as regards the
circumstances established against him but not put to him
and if the accused is unable to offer the appellate court
any plausible or reasonable explanation of such
circumstances, the court may assume that no acceptable
answer exists and that even if the accused had been
questioned at the proper time in the trial court he would
not have been able to furnish any good ground to get out
of the circumstances on which the trial court had relied
for its conviction.”
19. The above approach shows that some dilution of the rigour of the
provision can be made even in the light of a contention raised by the
accused that non-questioning him on a vital circumstance by the trial court
has caused prejudice to him. The explanation offered by the counsel of the
accused at the appellate stage was held to be a sufficient substitute for the
answers given by the accused himself.
20. What is the object of examination of an accused under Section 313 of
the Code? The section itself declares the object in explicit language that it is
“for the purpose of enabling the accused personally to explain any
circumstances appearing in the evidence against him”. In Jai Dev v. State of
Punjab (AIR1963 SC 612) Gajendragadkar, J. (as he then was) speaking for
a three-Judge Bench has focussed on the ultimate test in determining
whether the provision has been fairly complied with. He observed thus:
12“The ultimate test in determining whether or not the
accused has been fairly examined under Section 342
would be to inquire whether, having regard to all the
questions put to him, he did get an opportunity to say
what he wanted to say in respect of prosecution case
against him. If it appears that the examination of the
accused person was defective and thereby a prejudice has
been caused to him, that would no doubt be a serious
infirmity.”
21. Thus it is well settled that the provision is mainly intended to benefit
the accused and as its corollary to benefit the court in reaching the final
conclusion.
22. At the same time it should be borne in mind that the provision is not
intended to nail him to any position, but to comply with the most salutary
principle of natural justice enshrined in the maxim audi alteram partem.
The word “may” in clause (a) of sub-section (1) in Section 313 of the Code
indicates, without any doubt, that even if the court does not put any question
under that clause the accused cannot raise any grievance for it. But if the
court fails to put the needed question under clause (b) of the sub-section it
would result in a handicap to the accused and he can legitimately claim that
no evidence, without affording him the opportunity to explain, can be used
13against him. It is now well settled that a circumstance about which the
accused was not asked to explain cannot be used against him.
23. But the situation to be considered now is whether, with the
revolutionary change in technology of communication and transmission and
the marked improvement in facilities for legal aid in the country, is it
necessary that in all cases the accused must answer by personally remaining
present in court. We clarify that this is the requirement and would be the
general rule. However, if remaining present involves undue hardship and
large expense, could the court not alleviate the difficulties. If the court holds
the view that the situation in which he made such a plea is genuine, should
the court say that he has no escape but he must undergo all the tribulations
and hardships and answer such questions personally presenting himself in
court. If there are other accused in the same case, and the court has already
completed their questioning, should they too wait for long without their case
reaching finality, or without registering further progress of their trial until
their co-accused is able to attend the court personally and answer the court
questions? Why should a criminal court be rendered helpless in such a
situation?
1424. The one category of offences which is specifically exempted from the
rigour of Section 313(1)(b) of the Code is “summons cases”. It must be
remembered that every case in which the offence triable is punishable with
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years is a “summons case”.
Thus, all other offences generally belong to a different category altogether
among which are included offences punishable with varying sentences from
imprisonment for three years up to imprisonment for life and even right up
to death penalty. Hence there are several offences in that category which are
far less serious in gravity compared with grave and very grave offences.
Even in cases involving less serious offences, can not the court extend a
helping hand to an accused who is placed in a predicament deserving such a
help?
25. Section 243(1) of the Code enables the accused, who is involved in
the trial of warrant case instituted on police report, to put in any written
statement. When any such statement is filed the court is obliged to make it
part of the record of the case. Even if such case is not instituted on police
report the accused has the same right (vide Section 247). Even the accused
involved in offences exclusively triable by the Court of Session can also
exercise such a right to put in written statements (Section 233(2) of the
15Code). It is common knowledge that most of such written statements, if not
all, are prepared by the counsel of the accused. If such written statements
can be treated as statements directly emanating from the accused, hook, line
and sinker, why not the answers given by him in the manner set out
hereinafter, in special contingencies, be afforded the same worth.
26. We think that a pragmatic and humanistic approach is warranted in
regard to such special exigencies. The word “shall” in clause (b) to Section
313(1) of the Code is to be interpreted as obligatory on the court and it
should be complied with when it is for the benefit of the accused. But if it
works to his great prejudice and disadvantage the court should, in
appropriate cases, e.g., if the accused satisfies the court that he is unable to
reach the venue of the court, except by bearing huge expenditure or that he
is unable to travel the long journey due to physical incapacity or some such
other hardship, relieve him of such hardship and at the same time adopt a
measure to comply with the requirements in Section 313 of the Code in a
substantial manner. How could this be achieved?
1627. The above position was indicated in Basav Raj R Patil v. State of
Karnataka (2000 (8) SCC 740) and Keya Mukherjee v. Magma Leasing Ltd.
and Ors. (2008) 8 SCC 447.
28. It is to be noted that in the instant case there was no reference to any
of the incriminating materials. If the foundation of the prosecution case was
the alleged confession before the Customs Authorities, that material was not
brought to the notice of the accused persons.
29. Above being the position, there is no infirmity in the impugned
judgment to warrant interference. The appeal is dismissed.
……………………………..…..J.
(Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)
………………..……….………..J.
(D.K. JAIN)
…………………………………..J.
(Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
New Delhi:
March 06, 2009
17