http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 4
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 556 of 2008
PETITIONER:
Golla Yelugu Govindu
RESPONDENT:
State of Andhra Pradesh
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 26/03/2008
BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT & P. SATHASIVAM
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.1041 of 2007)
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J
1. Leave granted.
2. Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a
Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court dismissing
the appeal filed by the appellant questioning correctness of his
conviction for offence punishable under Section 302 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short \021IPC\022) and sentence of
imprisonment for life and fine as imposed by learned IVth
Additional Sessions Judge, (F.T.C.), Anantapur.
2. Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:
The marriage between Dhanalakshmi (hereinafter
referred to as \021deceased\022) and the accused took place 14 years
prior to the date of incident. During the wedlock, they were
blessed with three children, namely, Golla Yelugu Adilakshmi
(PW2), Golla Yelugu Anjaneyulu (PW3) and Gollal Yelugu
Venkatesu (LW7). At the time of marriage, the accused was
doing cultivation. After marriage the deceased and the
accused lived happily for some years. Due to addiction to
vices, he started ill-treating his wife, demanding her to get
money from her parents. About six months prior to the
occurrence, the accused beat and caused fracture to the hand
of the deceased and sent her along with her children to her
parents\022 house. He again took them back by promising to look
after them well and kept his family at Pamidi. Ten days prior
to the occurrence, the accused sold his autorickshaw and
cleared his debts and asked his wife to get money from her
parents to purchase another autorickshaw. But the parents of
the deceased did not comply with the said demand. On
20.6.2002 at about 2 A.M. while the deceased was in the
house, there was exchange of hot words and quarrel between
the accused and deceased. This happened in the presence of
their children. Suddenly accused hacked the deceased on her
back with a sickle and the deceased fell down and the accused
once again hacked on the neck and left ear of the deceased
causing severe bleeding injuries. Accused went to the house
of LW3 and confessed the offence before him. LW3 went and
informed the same to the father of the deceased, PW1. PW1
lodged a complaint before the police and on its basis a case in
Cr.No.35/2002 was registered for the offence punishable
under Section 302 IPC by PW11, who conducted inquest over
the dead body of the deceased in the presence of PWs. 5, 8 and
LW16: examined some witnesses and recorded theirhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 4
statements; seized the clothes and blood stained mat covered
under MOs. 1 to 4; prepared rough sketch under Ex.P.7,
forwarded the material objects to the Forensic Science
Laboratory, Hyderabad for analysis through the Judicial First
Class Magistrate, Gooty and arrested the accused on
25.6.2002, and at his instance MOs 5-sickle and 6-bag were
recovered. PW6, the Medical Officer, who conducted autopsy
over the dead body of the deceased opined that the deceased
would appear to have died due to hemorrhage and shock due
to cut laceration over the throat involving the major blood
vessel. After completion of the investigation, charge sheet was
filed.
3. In order to establish the accusations the prosecution
examined 11 witnesses and marked several exhibits and MOs.
The accused did not adduce any oral or documentary
evidence. He however pleaded innocence.
4. After analyzing the evidence of eyewitnesses PWs2 and 3,
and finding that they are corroborated by the evidence of PWs
1 and 7, the appellant was found guilty.
5. In appeal, the appellant took the plea that PWs. 2 and 3
should not have been pleaded as they are of tender age and
were child witnesses. The High Court found that PWs. 2 and 3
were children of the deceased and the accused and there was
no reason as to why they would falsely implicate their father.
The High Court also discarded the plea that they were under
the influence of PW1, their maternal grandfather. As noted
above, the appeal was dismissed.
6. In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the
appellant submitted that reliance should be placed on the
evidence of PWs 2&3 and in any event offence under Section
302 IPC is not made out.
7. Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in short the \021Evidence Act\022) does
not prescribe any particular age as a determinative factor to
treat a witness to be a competent one. On the contrary,
Section 118 of the Evidence Act envisages that all persons
shall be competent to testify, unless the Court considers that
they are prevented from understanding the questions put to
them or from giving rational answers to these questions,
because of tender years, extreme old age, disease- whether of
mind, or any other cause of the same kind. A child of tender
age can be allowed to testify if he has intellectual capacity to
understand questions and give rational answers thereto. This
position was concisely stated by Brewer J in Wheeler v. United
States (159 U.S. 523). The evidence of a child witness is not
required to be rejected per se; but the Court as a rule of
prudence considers such evidence with close scrutiny and
only on being convinced about the quality thereof and
reliability can record conviction, based thereon. (See Surya
Narayana v. State of Karnataka (2001 (1) Supreme 1).
8. In Dattu Ramrao Sakhare v. State of Maharashtra (1997
(5) SCC 341) it was held as follows:
\023A child witness if found competent
to depose to the facts and reliable one such
evidence could be the basis of conviction. In
other words even in the absence of oath the
evidence of a child witness can be considered
under Section 118 of the Evidence Act
provided that such witness is able tohttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 4
understand the answers thereof. The evidence
of a child witness and credibility thereof
would depend upon the circumstances of
each case. The only precaution which the
Court should bear in mind while assessing
the evidence of a child witness is that the
witness must be a reliable one and his/her
demeanour must be like any other competent
witness and there is no likelihood of being
tutored\024.
9. The decision on the question whether the child witness
has sufficient intelligence primarily rests with the trial Judge
who notices his manners, his apparent possession or lack of
intelligence, and said Judge may resort to any examination
which will tend to disclose his capacity and intelligence as well
as his understanding of the obligation of an oath. The decision
of the trial court may, however, be disturbed by the higher
Court if from what is preserved in the records, it is clear his
conclusion was erroneous. This precaution is necessary
because child witnesses are amenable to tutoring and often
live in a world of make beliefs. Though it is an established
principle that child witnesses are dangerous witnesses as they
are pliable and liable to be influenced easily, shaped and
moulded, but it is also an accepted norm that if after careful
scrutiny of their evidence the Court comes to the conclusion
that there is an impress of truth in it, there is no obstacle in
the way of accepting the evidence of a child witness.
10. It is submitted that Section 302 IPC has no application
as the assault was made during the course of sudden quarrel
and Exception 4 of Section 300 IPC applies.
11. The residuary plea relates to the applicability of
Exception 4 of Section 300 IPC, as it is contended that the
incident took place in course of a sudden quarrel.
12. For bringing in its operation it has to be established that
the act was committed without premeditation, in a sudden
fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel without the
offender having taken undue advantage and not having acted
in a cruel or unusual manner.
13. The Fourth Exception of Section 300 IPC covers acts
done in a sudden fight. The said exception deals with a case
of prosecution not covered by the first exception, after which
its place would have been more appropriate. The exception is
founded upon the same principle, for in both there is absence
of premeditation. But, while in the case of Exception 1 there is
total deprivation of self-control, in case of Exception 4, there is
only that heat of passion which clouds men\022s sober reason and
urges them to deeds which they would not otherwise do.
There is provocation in Exception 4 as in Exception 1; but the
injury done is not the direct consequence of that provocation.
In fact Exception 4 deals with cases in which notwithstanding
that a blow may have been struck, or some provocation given
in the origin of the dispute or in whatever way the quarrel may
have originated, yet the subsequent conduct of both parties
puts them in respect of guilt upon equal footing. A \021sudden
fight\022 implies mutual provocation and blows on each side. The
homicide committed is then clearly not traceable to unilateral
provocation, nor in such cases could the whole blame behttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 4
placed on one side. For if it were so, the Exception more
appropriately applicable would be Exception 1. There is no
previous deliberation or determination to fight. A fight
suddenly takes place, for which both parties are more or less
to be blamed. It may be that one of them starts it, but if the
other had not aggravated it by his own conduct it would not
have taken the serious turn it did. There is then mutual
provocation and aggravation, and it is difficult to apportion the
share of blame which attaches to each fighter. The help of
Exception 4 can be invoked if death is caused (a) without
premeditation, (b) in a sudden fight; (c) without the offender
having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
manner; and (d) the fight must have been with the person
killed. To bring a case within Exception 4 all the ingredients
mentioned in it must be found. It is to be noted that the \021fight\022
occurring in Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC is not defined in
the IPC. It takes two to make a fight. Heat of passion requires
that there must be no time for the passions to cool down and
in this case, the parties have worked themselves into a fury on
account of the verbal altercation in the beginning. A fight is a
combat between two and more persons whether with or
without weapons. It is not possible to enunciate any general
rule as to what shall be deemed to be a sudden quarrel. It is a
question of fact and whether a quarrel is sudden or not must
necessarily depend upon the proved facts of each case. For
the application of Exception 4, it is not sufficient to show that
there was a sudden quarrel and there was no premeditation. It
must further be shown that the offender has not taken undue
advantage or acted in cruel or unusual manner. The
expression \021undue advantage\022 as used in the provision means
\021unfair advantage\022.
14. Where the offender takes undue advantage or has acted
in a cruel or unusual manner, the benefit of Exception 4
cannot be given to him. If the weapon used or the manner of
attack by the assailant is out of all proportion, that
circumstance must be taken into consideration to decide
whether undue advantage has been taken. In Kikar Singh v.
State of Rajasthan (AIR 1993 SC 2426) it was held that if the
accused used deadly weapons against the unarmed man and
struck a blow on the head it must be held that giving the
blows with the knowledge that they were likely to cause death,
he had taken undue advantage.
15. Considering the factual scenario in the background of the
position in law as highlighted above, the inevitable conclusion
is that the appropriate conviction would be under Section 304
Part I IPC. Custodial sentence of 10 years would meet the
ends of justice. Appeal is allowed to that extent.