http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 5
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 1046 of 2000
PETITIONER:
Mohan Lal
RESPONDENT:
State of Rajasthan
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 03/12/2002
BENCH:
M.B. SHAH & B.P. SINGH.
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
B.P. SINGH, J.
The appellant Mohan Lal was put up for trial before the
Court of Special Judge, S.C./S.T. (P.A.CC.), Sri Ganganagar in
Criminal Case No. 4 of 1997 charged of the offences under Section
376 IPC and Section 3(2)(5) of the SC/ST (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act. The learned Special Judge by his judgment and
order dated 6th February, 1998 found the appellant guilty of the
offence under Section 376 IPC and sentenced him to undergo 7
years rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs.20,000/-, in
default of payment of fine to undergo further imprisonment for one
year. The appellant was, however, acquitted of the charge under
Section 3(2)(5) of the SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.
S.B. Criminal Appeal No. 123 of 1998 preferred by the
appellant against his conviction and sentence was dismissed by the
High Court of Rajasthan at Jodhpur by judgment and order dated
13th August, 1999. This appeal has been preferred by special
leave.
The case of the prosecution is that prosecutrix K (PW.1) is
the daughter of PW.2 resident of village Birdhwal in the district of
Sri Ganganagar. The appellant is also a resident of the same
village. On 8th October, 1996 at about 10.00 or 11.00 a.m.
prosecutrix had proceeded with Draupadi, wife of Bhani Ram to
cut grass. Draupadi induced her to accompany her to the house of
the appellant, who was his ’Jeth’ (husband’s elder brother) on the
pretext of collecting her sickle and cloth sheet, where she was
confined in a room belonging to the appellant who was present
inside the room. He confined her in that room for about 3 4
hours and during this period raped her thrice. At one time she had
come out of the room in the courtyard when she was seen by her
brother PW.5 who resided in the adjacent house, but she was again
pushed inside the room by the appellant and kept confined there
for some more time. PW.5 became suspicious having seen a girl in
the courtyard of the appellant. It is not in dispute that the house of
PW.5 is adjacent to the house of the appellant and there is only a
fence which separates the two courtyards. PW.3, brother of PW.5
had come to him and PW.5 asked him to call PW.2, the informant,
father of the prosecutrix. After sometime, PW.2 came to him and
he was told that there was a girl in the house of the appellant.
Asking PW.3 to keep a watch, PW.2 went to call Parma Nand and
Prithvi Ram with whom he went to the house of the appellant. Athttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 5
that time appellant had left his house but he found Sulochana and
Draupadi, wives of the two brothers of the appellant sweeping the
floor in the courtyard. Prosecutrix was found inside a room and
she was brought out with the help of PW.5, Parma Nand and
Prithvi Ram (both not examined). Prosecutrix was terrified and it
took sometimes to pacify her. All this happened at about 4.00 p.m.
Prosecutrix thereafter narrated the entire incident to her father
PW.2. According to the prosecution, since it was about sun set
time and there was no conveyance available to go to police station
at Rajiasar, which was at a distance of about 14 Kms., the
informant, PW.2 went to the police station next morning after
arranging for a jeep at about 10.00 a.m. At the police station, the
Station House Officer was not available and he was told by the
other policeman present there to bring his daughter so that his
report could be recorded. He, therefore, sent his son back to the
village in the jeep and thereafter prosecutrix, PW.1 came to the
police station at about 4.00 p.m. By that time the Station House
Officer had come and he was able to lodge his report Ext. P.1.
Though the first information report is said to have been
recorded at about 4.15 p.m. on 9th October, 1996 at Police Station
Rajiasar, the special report was received by the Court at Suratgarh
only at 11 O’ clock on 10th October, 1996. It also appears that the
investigation commenced only on the 11th October, 1996 and the
statement of PW.5 was recorded as late as on 13th October, 1996
i.e. 4 days after the lodging of the first information report. It
appears that for about 2 days there was no investigation and this
gave rise to the submission urged on behalf of the appellant that in
fact the first information report was lodged after considerable
delay and only after due deliberations. This explained why the
special report did not reach the Court in time and also explained
why the investigation commenced after 2 days and a very
important witness, PW.5 was examined after 4 days of the lodging
of the first information report, even though there is no explanation
for such delay.
The prosecution examined several witnesses. The
prosecutrix K was examined as PW.1; her father (informant) as
PW.2, her cousins were examined as PW.3 and PW.5. The
prosecutix has described PW.5 as her brother. In fact the trial
court has recorded a finding that PW.5 was not her brother because
he is not the son of PW.2. The trial court, however, lost sight of
the statement of PW.2 that PW.3 was his sister’s son. It cannot
therefore, be disputed that PW.3 and PW.5 are the cousins of the
prosecutrix K. PW.8 - Bhagwant Singh was examined to prove
the recording of the first information report at the police station.
PW.4 and PW.7, namely Mam Raj Singh and Dharam Pal Singh,
are the investigating officers. Dr. Vijay Prakash Beniwal, PW.6
had medically examined the appellant and the prosecutrix. The
prosecution also placed on record Ext P.14, the report of the
Forensic Science Laboratory, which proves that there was semen
on the ’salwar’ of the prosecutrix and ’kaccha’ of the appellant.
Before the trial court it was contended on behalf of the
defence that no such occurrence took place and that the appellant
had been falsely implicated. In the alternative it was submitted
that in any event the evidence on record discloses that the
prosecutrix was a consenting party and, therefore, offence under
Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code is not made out. We may
notice at this stage that the prosecutrix herself stated that she was
married a year before the occurrence and at that time her age was
18 years. Later she stated that her age was 15-16 years at the time
of marriage. The courts below have proceeded on the basis that
she was in any case above 16 years of age on the date of
occurrence.http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 5
The trial court as well as the High Court accepting the
evidence of PWs.1, 2, 3 & 5 found the appellant guilty of the
offence under Section 376 IPC. Learned amicus curiae appearing
on behalf of the appellant submitted before us that the courts below
have not even closely examined the evidence on record. The
cross-examination of the witnesses, according to him, will disclose
that the prosecutrix K, PW.1 was a consenting party and this was
not her first sexual intercourse with the appellant. He submitted
that the courts below on a very superficial appreciation of the
evidence on record, completely ignoring the statements made by
the prosecutrix in course of her cross-examination, which
supported the case of the defence, have placed reliance on her
testimony, which according to him, is unworthy of belief. He
submitted that this was a case where on facts coming to the
knowledge of the informant, father of the prosecutrix, only after
discussing the matter with his relatives and others, the informant
lodged a false report on the next day.
With the assistance of learned counsel for the parties, we
have perused the entire evidence on record since it was submitted
that the courts below have not subjected the evidence to a critical
scrutiny. We find that there is substance in the submission of the
learned amicus curiae.
The only question which has to be considered is whether the
prosecutrix was a consenting party.
In this regard the medical evidence is not of much assistance
since the prosecutrix was a married woman and habituated to
sexual intercourse as deposed by Dr. Beniwal, PW.6. He did not
find any injury on the body of the prosecutrix and on her private
parts. One thing is, however, noticeable, namely that according to
the prosecutrix when the appellant tried to rape her, on account of
her resistance, her bangles were broken and injuries were caused to
her wrist. No such injury was also found on the person of the
prosecutrix. We have, therefore, to closely examine the evidence
of the prosecutrix and other witnesses.
A mere perusal of the evidence of the prosecutrix -K, PW.1,
would show that in her examination-in-chief she stated that
Draupadi, the wife of the brother of the accused, took her to the
house of her brother-in-law on the pretext that she had to pick a
sickle and a cloth sheet which was lying in the courtyard of the
appellant. The prosecutrix accompanied her but as soon as they
entered the courtyard of the appellant, she was pushed into a
’kotha’ by Draupadi, who closed the door from outside. Inside the
’kotha’ (room) the appellant was present who closed the door from
inside by fixing the chain. Thereafter he committed rape on her
thrice. When she started weeping, he threatened her saying that if
she reported the matter, he will kill all the ladies of her house.
According to the prosecutrix, after having sexual intercourse with
her thrice, he opened the door and looked in different directions to
see if someone was present. Finding an opportunity, she ran out
into the courtyard, but she was caught in the courtyard by the
appellant and again brought to the room. After sometime the
accused-appellant went away but the wives of his brothers, namely
Draupadi and Sulochana kept sitting outside the ’kotha’. They
also threatened her and did not permit her to come out from the
room. After about an hour, her father came and she was rescued.
She further deposed that on the first occasion when she had run out
of the room, she was seen by her brother (cousin) PW.5. His house
was situated in the neighborhood and PW.5 could see a person
standing in the courtyard of the appellant. After being rescued by
her father, she was brought to her house at about 4.00 p.m. and
thereafter on the next day, she had gone to the police station wherehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 5
the first information report was lodged.
This witness was cross-examined at length and confronted
with the statement made by her in the course of investigation,
Ext.D.1. The first fact to be noticed is that in her statement made
during the course of investigation, she had not even mentioned the
fact that she was pushed into the room of the appellant by
Draupadi. She had also not stated that after the appellant went
away, those two ladies came and threatened her and did not permit
her to go out. She could not give any explanation as to how such
statements were not recorded. She also stated that she did not
assault the appellant with her sickle because he had slapped her
twice or thrice. The story of slapping is not found in her statement
made under Section 161 Cr. P.C. It also appears from the cross-
examination that she did not resist the appellant when he was
removing her clothes, and he had sexual intercourse with her thrice
with ease. On account of fear, she did not make any noise. The
appellant committed rape on her easily. She admitted that her
father came to the courtyard of the appellant about half and hour
after the appellant had left and during that period she remained in
the house of the appellant. She denied the suggestion that she hid
herself in the room of the appellant since she suspected that she
had been noticed by her cousin, PW.5, who was a neighbour of the
appellant. She denied this suggestion, but when confronted with
the statement, Ext.D.1 made in the course of investigation to the
effect that she hid herself in the ’kotha’, she had no explanation to
offer. She further stated that after the appellant had left, she did
not raise an alarm because the two ladies had come there and they
kept sitting there for about half an hour i.e. till the time her father
and PW.5 came to the house of the appellant. Even this is not
found in her statement made in the course of investigation. She
asserted that Parma Nand and Prithvi Jat had not come with her
father but she could not say how their names find place in the
statement made by her to the police.
It was suggested to the witness that she used to meet the
appellant even prior to the incident in question and that she was
paid Rs.50/- on earlier occasions as well by the appellant for
having sexual intercourse with her. She was confronted with her
statement under Section 161 Cr. P.C. wherein she had admitted
the fact that the appellant had been giving her fifty rupees.
Another significant statement which deserves to be noticed is that
though the prosecutrix denied having taken tea with Sulochana and
Draupadi, in her statement to the police she had stated that she had
taken tea with them and Mohan Lal. It is also significant that in
her statement made during the course of investigation this witness
had not stated that she had attempted to run away earlier but she
was again pushed inside the room by the appellant. This was the
time when she had been noticed by her cousin, PW.5.
We have noticed these omissions and contradictions in her
cross-examination only with a view to test the credibility of this
witness because the conviction of the appellant is based primarily
on her evidence. We find that in the course of investigation, she
had not stated that she was forcibly pushed inside the room of the
appellant ; or that the appellant had slapped her and out of fear she
did not raise a hue and cry; or that after the appellant went away,
she was not permitted to leave by the wives of the two brothers of
the appellant but on the contrary she had hidden herself inside the
room after having been seen by PW.5. Moreover her statement in
the course of investigation that on earlier occasions she had been
paid Rs.50/- by the appellant and that she had tea with them on the
day of occurrence as well, creates a serious doubt about the
truthfulness of the version of the prosecutrix and we find it unsafe
to rely upon her testimony to convict the appellant. Not only this,http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 5
the case of the prosecution even otherwise does not appear to be
credible and it appears that the father of the prosecutrix, PW.2 on
discovering that the prosecutrix was involved with the appellant,
after due deliberations, lodged a report implicating the appellant.
PW.5 undoubtedly is a cousin of the prosecutrix. He lived
in the house adjacent to the house of the appellant and it is the
prosecution case that anyone in the courtyard of the appellant can
be seen from the house of PW.5. The case of the prosecution is
that when the prosecutrix first attempted to run away and was in
the courtyard, she was seen by PW.5. The evidence is not clear as
to whether PW.5 had identified the prosecutrix. There is, however,
no doubt that the prosecutrix had seen PW.5. If PW.5 had
identified the prosecutrix there is no reason why he did not
immediately come to her rescue seeing that the appellant had
forcibly pushed her inside his room. If he had not identified the
girl, as being the prosecutrix, there appears to be no reason for his
asking his brother PW.3 to call PW.2, father of the prosecutrix.
Learned amicus curiae submitted that prosecutrix having seen
PW.5, hid inside the room of the appellant to avoid identification,
and this is what she stated in her statement in the course of
investigation. This only fits in with the case of the defence that
though she was a consenting party, she was afraid that her cousin,
PW.5 may come to know of the clandestine affair and expose her.
PW.5, it was submitted, called her father because he may have
thought that the father of the prosecutrix should take whatever
steps he may consider necessary as his daughter was involved.
From the evidence of PW.2, the informant, it appears that PW.5
did not disclose to him the fact that the girl he had seen in the
house of the appellant was his daughter, yet PW.2, the informant,
called two other persons and only thereafter entered the house of
the appellant. These facts do tend to support the case of the
defence that the prosecutrix having been seen by PW.5 in the
house of the appellant despite best efforts to conceal herself, the
latter called her father and her father alongwith PW.5 and two
others thereafter went to the house of the appellant.
So far as the last part of the prosecution case is concerned,
namely the recovery of the prosecutrix from the room of the
appellant, the evidence supports the case of the defence that the
prosecutrix was hiding behind the ladies when her father and
others came to her rescue. The normal conduct of the prosecutrix
in such circumstances would have been to rush to the persons who
came to her rescue and not to hide behind the two ladies said to be
the wives of the brothers of the appellant.
All these facts lead us to seriously doubt the truthfulness of
the case of the prosecution and we are satisfied that the prosecution
has failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt.
In the result this appeal is allowed, the conviction of the
appellant is set aside and he is acquitted of the charge levelled
against him. The appellant shall be released forthwith unless
required in connection with any other case.
We place on record our appreciation of the useful assistance
rendered by Shri Ranbir Singh Yadav, amicus curiae. We direct
that a sum of Rs.750/- shall be paid to him for rendering assistance
to the Court.