NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 636 OF 2010
STALIN @ SATALIN SAMUVEL ...APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE REPRESENTED BY THE
INSPECTOR OF POLICE ...RESPONDENT(S)
WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 639 OF 2010
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 496 OF 2012
J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1. The present appeals challenge the judgment dated 19th
February 2009 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court
of Judicature at Madras, thereby dismissing the appeals filed by
the appellants herein and affirming the judgment dated 14th
November 2007 passed by the learned Principal Sessions Judge,
1Thiruvallur District (hereinafter referred to as “the trial court”),
thereby convicting the appellants herein for the offences
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 149 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “IPC”) and sentencing them
to suffer life imprisonment. The trial court further convicted the
appellants herein under Section 109 read with Section 201,
Section 109 read with Section 182 and Sections 120B and 148
of the IPC and sentenced them to suffer rigorous imprisonment
for the different periods under the said Sections.
2. The prosecution story, in brief, is as under:
Deceased M.R. Ravi was carrying on real estate business
in Yadaval Street, Padi. He also happened to be the Town
Secretary of AIADMK party of Ambattur. It is the prosecution
case that accused Nos. 1 and 11 also belonged to the same
political party. Accused Nos. 12 to 14 were close associates of
accused No. 1. It is the prosecution case that deceased M.R.
Ravi belonged to one group of the said political party whereas
accused Nos. 1 and 11 belonged to the other group. According
to the prosecution, they thus developed enmity towards the
2deceased. Accused No.1 was arrested in a case under the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 and
accused No. 11 was arrested in a case under the IPC and they
strongly believed that they were arrested only on the instigation
of the deceased.
3. According to the prosecution, on 2nd June 2006 at around
10.30 a.m., deceased M.R. Ravi was inside his cabin and
Kumar (PW-1), Palani (PW-2) and Sivalingam (PW-3) were
sitting in the office outside his cabin. At that time, six persons
came there and enquired about the deceased M.R. Ravi from
Palani (PW-2) and Sivalingam (PW-3), who were employees of
the deceased. Though the accused persons were informed that
the deceased was performing puja, four out of six accused
persons forcibly entered into the cabin of the deceased and
stabbed him with knives. It is the prosecution case that on
seeing this, Kumar (PW-1), in order to save his life, ran from
there. Accused Nagoor Meeran (since deceased), who was
standing outside with the other accused persons, attempted to
3stab Kumar (PW-1). On seeing this, Palani (PW-2) and
Sivalingam (PW-3) also ran from there.
4. As per the prosecution case, Kumar (PW-1), Palani (PW-2)
and Sivalingam (PW-3) returned to the office of the deceased
M.R. Ravi after five to ten minutes and found that the deceased
was still alive. Kumar (PW-1), Palani (PW-2) and Sivalingam
(PW-3) took him to Sundaram Medical Foundation Hospital and
admitted him in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Despite
treatment, deceased M.R. Ravi died on the same day.
5. Total 18 accused were arrested. Accused Nagoor Meeran
died in an encounter while being apprehended by the police.
Upon completion of investigation, charge-sheet was filed against
the accused persons and the case was committed to the Court
of Sessions. The accused persons denied the charges and
claimed to be tried. Accused Nos. 3 and 13 were absconding
and as such, their case was separated. The trial court, vide
judgment dated 14th November 2007, convicted the accused
persons and sentenced them as aforesaid.
46. Being aggrieved thereby, various appeals came to be filed
before the High Court. The High Court, vide impugned
judgment dated 19th February 2009, affirmed the conviction
and sentence passed by the trial court insofar as accused Nos.
1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 are concerned. The High Court acquitted
accused Nos. 7 to 12 and 14 to 18. Being aggrieved thereby,
the present appeals are filed on behalf of accused Nos. 2 and 4
to 6.
7. We have heard Dr. Yug Mohit Chaudhury, learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 636
of 2010, Shri Siddharth Aggarwaal, learned Senior Counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellants in Criminal Appeal Nos.
639 of 2010 and 496 of 2012. We have also heard Dr. Joseph
Aristotle S., learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent-State.
8. It is submitted on behalf of the appellants herein that the
conviction is recorded basically on the evidence of Kumar (PW-
1), Palani (PW-2) and Sivalingam (PW-3), who are alleged to be
the eye witnesses. It is, however, submitted that if the evidence
5of Syed Jamal (PW-23), who was at the relevant time, working
as Sub-Inspector of Police, Korattur Police Station and M.
Rangarajan (PW-25), Inspector of Police, Korattur Police
Station, Investigating Officer (IO) is considered in correct
perspective, it would reveal that the said eye witnesses were not
present at the spot. It is submitted that the accused persons
are alleged to have been identified in the Test Identification
Parade (TIP). It is however submitted that, if the evidence of
Malarvizhi (PW-4), the then Judicial Magistrate who conducted
the TIP is examined, the same would show that the TIP was
totally fallible and as such, the conviction could not have been
recorded on the basis of such a TIP.
9. Per contra, Dr. Aristotle submitted that the evidence of all
the three eye witnesses, i.e., Kumar (PW-1), Palani (PW-2) and
Sivalingam (PW-3) is consistent. He further submitted that on
the basis of the evidence of Sasikala (PW-6), the enmity between
the accused persons and the deceased is also brought on
record. He further submitted that the other evidence would
6also establish that the accused persons had gathered around
the office of the deceased.
10. Kumar (PW-1), Palani (PW-2) and Sivalingam (PW-3) are
the eye witnesses. The evidence given by all of them is on
similar line.
11. Kumar (PW-1), in his evidence, specifically stated that two
persons from North Mada Street, two persons from Yadaval
Street and two persons from M.D.H. Road came to see the
deceased M.R. Ravi. They went inside the office of the
deceased. Palani (PW-2) and Sivalingam (PW-3) were also sitting
there in the office. PW-1 stated that the accused persons
enquired about the deceased and they were informed that the
deceased was performing puja and they cannot meet him.
However, the accused persons forcibly entered into the chamber
of the deceased and attacked him. PW-1 further stated that
thereafter he ran away from there. According to PW-1, when he
came back to the office after five minutes, he found the
deceased alive. PW-1 took the deceased to Sundaram
Foundation Hospital.
712. A perusal of the evidence of Kumar (PW-1) would reveal
that, on the next day, i.e., 3rd June 2006, he was called to the
Police Station. The police showed him photos of the persons
involved in the crime and asked him to identify them. PW-1
identified Nagoor Meeran (since deceased).
13. Kumar (PW-1), in his complaint, referred to six unknown
persons committing the crime. Though, he states that he knows
the accused, however, he admitted that he has not given any
details as to whether the accused persons were tall, short, dark
or fair. He further admitted that he has also not given any
description as to what clothes the accused were wearing at that
time. He further admitted that though the Inspector of Police,
Korattur asked him thrice about the identification of the
accused persons and the details of the clothes worn by them,
he did not give any detail. He further admitted that the photos
of the accused persons were shown to him in the Police Station.
The evidence of Palani (PW-2) and Sivalingam (PW-3) is to the
same effect. Both these witnesses also admitted that the
8photos of the accused persons were shown to them in the Police
Station.
14. Syed Jamal (PW-23), the then Sub-Inspector of Police,
Korattur Police Station admitted in his evidence that he had not
seized the blood-stained clothes of the witnesses. He further
stated that he did not seize the said clothes since they did not
have any alternative dress.
15. Syed Jamal (PW-23) immediately went to the spot after
receiving the information in the Police Station. He stated that
he had sent the deceased along with his friends, i.e., Kumar
(PW-1), Palani (PW-2) and Sivalingam (PW-3) to the hospital.
He admitted that he did not seize the clothes of Kumar (PW-1)
since there were no blood stains on the clothes and as Kumar
(PW-1) was not available at the place of occurrence. He
similarly admitted that the clothes of Palani (PW-2) and
Sivalingam (PW-3) were also not seized since they were also not
available at the place of occurrence. He admitted that there
were various other persons apart from Kumar (PW-1) who had
witnessed the incident but he did not make any enquiry with
9them. It will further be relevant to refer to the following
admission of Syed Jamal (PW-23) in the cross-examination:
“It is correct, if it is stated that I had mentioned in the
5th line of page 2 of the printed F.I.R. “I had sent him
to Sundaram Hospital to undergo treatment, with his
friends, who came there after knowing the
information”.”
[emphasis supplied]
16. Syed Jamal (PW-23) further admitted that when he
enquired with Kumar (PW-1), Palani (PW-2) and Sivalingam
(PW-3), he did not mention anything regarding the identification
marks, body structure and clothes of the accused persons.
17. M. Rangarajan (PW-25), the then Inspector of Police,
Korattur Police Station is another IO. He also admitted in his
evidence that the persons who had accompanied the deceased
in the hospital arrived there after coming to know about the
incident.
18. A perusal of the evidence of these witnesses would cast a
shadow of great doubt as to whether Kumar (PW-1), Palani (PW-
2) and Sivalingam (PW-3) were really present at the time of the
incident or not. From the evidence of Kumar (PW-1), Palani
10(PW-2) and Sivalingam (PW-3), Syed Jamal (PW-23) and M.
Rangarajan (PW-25), a possibility of PWs 1 to 3 arriving at the
spot after coming to know about the incident, cannot be ruled
out.
19. The trial court and the High Court have relied on the TIP
conducted by PW-4. It will be relevant to refer to the admission
of Malarvizhi (PW-4) in her cross-examination, which reads
thus:
“It is correct that in my report I have stated that the
policeman of Korattur Police Station took photos and
videos for showing to the witness to identify the
accused in the lock-up which was objected by the
accused Stalin and Vinayagamurthy. It is correct that
I had not asked the witnesses as to whether the
identified persons were known to them prior to the
identification parades.”
20. It will further be apposite to refer to the following
admission of Malarvizhi (PW-4) in her cross-examination:
“It is correct that I have not stated at what time the
parade commenced and closed. After the completion
of the identification parade, when I asked Arikrishnan,
whether there were any objections about identification
parade he stated that the Investigating Officer and
Sub Inspector kept them under custody in Korattur
Police Station for eight days for identification of the
11witnesses. It is correct that photos and video were
taken and Arikrishnan has signed and the other 2
accused also stated the same.”
21. It can thus clearly be seen that the policeman of Korattur
Police Station had taken photos and videos for showing them to
the witnesses to identify the accused persons in the lock-up
which, was also objected by accused No. 2 Stalin and accused
No. 3 Vinayagamurthy. Malarvizhi (PW-4) further admitted that
when she asked accused No.4 Harikrishnan @ Hari whether
there were any objections about TIP, he stated that the IO and
the Sub-Inspector of Police had kept them under custody in
Korattur Police Station for eight days for identification of the
witnesses. She further admitted that the TIP was conducted in
an open ground. In our considered view, reliance could not
have been placed on such a TIP which is full of lacunas.
22. Recently, this Court, in the case of Gireesan Nair and
Others v. State of Kerala1, observed thus:
“31. In cases where the witnesses have had ample
opportunity to see the accused before the
identification parade is held, it may adversely affect
1 (2023) 1 SCC 180
12the trial. It is the duty of the prosecution to
establish before the court that right from the day of
arrest, the accused was kept “baparda” to rule out
the possibility of their face being seen while in
police custody. If the witnesses had the opportunity
to see the accused before the TIP, be it in any form
i.e. physically, through photographs or via media
(newspapers, television, etc.), the evidence of the TIP
is not admissible as a valid piece of evidence (Lal
Singh v. State of U.P. [Lal Singh v. State of U.P.,
(2003) 12 SCC 554 : 2004 SCC (Cri) Supp 489]
and Suryamoorthi v. Govindaswamy [Suryamoorthi v
. Govindaswamy, (1989) 3 SCC 24 : 1989 SCC (Cri)
472] ).
32. If identification in the TIP has taken place after
the accused is shown to the witnesses, then not
only is the evidence of TIP inadmissible, even an
identification in a court during trial is meaningless
(Sk. Umar Ahmed Shaikh v. State of
Maharashtra [Sk. Umar Ahmed Shaikh v. State of
Maharashtra, (1998) 5 SCC 103 : 1998 SCC (Cri)
1276] ). Even a TIP conducted in the presence of a
police officer is inadmissible in light of Section 162
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(Chunthuram v. State of
Chhattisgarh [Chunthuram v. State of Chhattisgarh,
(2020) 10 SCC 733 : (2021) 1 SCC (Cri) 9]
and Ramkishan Mithanlal Sharma v. State of
Bombay [Ramkishan Mithanlal Sharma v. State of
Bombay, (1955) 1 SCR 903 : AIR 1955 SC 104] ).
33. It is significant to maintain a healthy ratio
between suspects and non-suspects during a TIP. If
rules to that effect are provided in Prison Manuals
or if an appropriate authority has issued guidelines
regarding the ratio to be maintained, then such
rules/guidelines shall be followed. The officer
conducting the TIP is under a compelling obligation
13to mandatorily maintain the prescribed ratio. While
conducting a TIP, it is a sine qua non that the non-
suspects should be of the same age-group and
should also have similar physical features (size,
weight, colour, beard, scars, marks, bodily injuries,
etc.) to that of the suspects. The officer concerned
overseeing the TIP should also record such physical
features before commencing the TIP proceeding.
This gives credibility to the TIP and ensures that the
TIP is not just an empty formality (Rajesh Govind
Jagesha v. State of Maharashtra [Rajesh Govind
Jagesha v. State of Maharashtra, (1999) 8 SCC 428 :
1999 SCC (Cri) 1452]
and Ravi v. State [Ravi v. State, (2007) 15 SCC 372 :
(2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 730] ).”
23. A perusal of the evidence of Malarvizhi (PW-4), Syed Jamal
(PW-23) and M. Rangarajan (PW-25) would reveal that none of
the aforesaid requisites were followed in the TIP in question. As
such, the conviction on the basis of such a TIP would not be
sustainable.
24. That leaves us with the alleged recovery of incriminating
material at the instance of the accused persons.
25. We find that the said recoveries are also not free from
doubt. However, in any case, only on the basis of the alleged
recovery, the conviction could not be sustained.
1426. From the material placed on record, it also appears that
the investigating agency, in the present case, appears to have
gone out of the way to create evidence against the accused
persons. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations
of the High Court made in the impugned judgment:
“Further at the time when the statement of
Thanikaivel was recorded by the Judicial Magistrate
under Sec.164 of Cr.P.C., he has categorically stated
that he was tortured by the police to give such a
statement, and thus, it would be quite clear that
the prosecution had withdrawn those witnesses in
order to avoid the situation that if they were
examined, it would go against the prosecution.”
[emphasis supplied]
27. We are of the considered view that the prosecution has
failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt and the
accused are entitled to benefit of doubt.
28. In the result, the appeals are allowed.
29. The judgment dated 14th November 2007 passed by the
trial court convicting and sentencing the appellants herein and
the impugned judgment dated 19th February 2009 passed by
the Division Bench of the High Court, affirming the same are
15quashed and set aside. The appellants herein are acquitted of
the charges levelled against them. The bail bonds of the accused
shall stand discharged.
30. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…..….......................J.
[B.R. GAVAI]
…….........................J.
[VIKRAM NATH]
NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 18, 2023.
16