http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 2
PETITIONER:
SURJAN SINGH & ANR.
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 13/08/1998
BENCH:
G.T. NANAVATI, S.P. KURDUKAR.
ACT:
HEADNOTE:
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
The two appellants and one Kashmir Singh were
convicted by the trial court for the offence punishable
under Sections 307 and 506 both read with Section 34 IPC, by
the court of Additional Sessions Judge, Faridabad, in
Sessions Case No. 31/88. The H igh Court confirmed their
conviction. All the convicted accused then filed a Special
leave petition in this court. Leave was not granted to
Kashmir Singh. It was granted to the appellants only.
The prosecution case against the appellants was that on
31.8.88 at about 6.00 p.m., they went to the house of
Bhagwan Singh and enquired from him whether he was willing
or not to vacate the house in his possession. Bhagwan Singh
told them that as he was the real owner of the house, the
question of vacating it did not arise. There upon, the
appellants exhorted Kashmir singh to finish Bhagwan Singh.
Kashmir Singh fired two shots from his pistol and causeed
injuries to Bhagwan Singh and Malkiat S ingh.
In order to prove its case, the prosecution examined the two
injured eye-witnesses and also led other evidence. After
appreciating their evidence, the trial court thought it safe
to rely upon it and also upon the evidence of Lattkan singh
- P.W.7 and Jagir Singh - P.W.8, who hadd rushed to the
place of the incident on hearing the cries of the injured.
The trial court disbelieved tthe defence case that someone
else and fired at them and caused injuries and that they
were falsely involved because o f property dispute. The
trial court convicted them as stated above.
The High Court on re-appreciation of the evidence agreed
with findings recorded by the trial court and confirmed the
conviction.
What was urged by the learned counsel for the appellant was
that the evidence of the eye-witnesses was not properly
appreciated by courts below and the reasons given for
accepting their evidence inspite of many infirmities therein
are not proper. H aving gone through their evidence, we
find that it does not suffer from any serious infirmity.
Their evidence was correctly appreciated by the trial court
and the High Court was right in confirming the findings
recorded by the trial court. All the three accused had gonehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 2
together to the house of Bhagwan Singh and the way they
acted thereafter leaves no doubt about their acting in
furtherance of theeir common intention. As they have been
rightly convicted under Sections 307 and 506 both read with
Section 34 IPC, this appeal is dismissed.
The appellants are on bail. Their bail is cancelled. They
are ordered to surrender to custody to serve out the
remaining part of their sentence.
end