IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2109 OF 2008
ASLAM APPELLANT
VERSUS
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH RESPONDENT
WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2110 OF 2008
GALLI APPELLANT
VERSUS
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH RESPONDENT
O R D E R
1. These appeals are directed against the judgment
and order passed by the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in Criminal Appeal Nos. 51 and 92
of 1996, dated 06.07.2007. By the impugned judgment and
order, the High Court has confirmed the judgment and order,
dated 18.01.1996, passed by the Trial Court in S.T. No. 557
of 1992 whereby and whereunder the Trial Court has
convicted the appellants for offence punishable under
Sections 376 read with 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
1
Page 1(“the IPC” for short) and sentenced them to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven years.
2. The prosecution case in brief is as under: The
prosecutrix, aged about 19 years was married and had an
infant daughter at the time of the incident. On 16.01.1992,
at 5:00 P.M., the accused persons, Aslam and Galli, upon
finding the prosecutrix (PW-1) working alone in her field,
had gagged her and committed rape on her in turns. After
the accused persons had left, the prosecutrix returned home
crying and immediately narrated the incident to PW-2,
Pradhan of the village. Since it was dark, PW-2 suggested
to PW-1 to lodge the report in the police station next
morning. On 17.01.1992, PW-1’s complaint was scribed by PW-
2 and FIR NO.2 of 1992 was registered against the accused
persons.
3. After due investigation, the accused persons were
charged for the offence punishable under Section 376 read
with Section 34 of the IPC and the case was committed to
trial.
2
Page 24. The Trial Court, after marshalling the facts and
through scrutiny of evidence on record including the
testimony of PW-1, has reached the conclusion that the
testimony of PW-1 inspires confidence and accordingly
rejected the case of defence, pleading acquittal on grounds
of delay in filing of FIR, no injuries being caused to PW-1
or the accused persons and PW-1 being a woman of loose
morals, in its entirety. The Trial Court has convicted the
accused persons for the aforesaid offence relying upon the
testimony of PW-1 corroborated by the evidence of PW-2 and
elimination of the possibility of any injuries having being
caused since the place of incident was Barsin field.
5. The accused persons, aggrieved by the aforesaid,
had preferred appeals before the High Court. The High
Court, after re-appreciation of entire evidence on record,
has concurred with the findings and conclusions reached by
the Trial Court and therefore, affirmed the judgment and
order passed by the Trial Court convicting the accused
persons for offence under Section 376 read with Section 34
of the IPC.
6. It is the correctness or otherwise of the
3
Page 3aforesaid judgment and order passed by the High Court which
is called in question in these appeals.
7. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for
the parties. Shri J.P. Dhanda, learned counsel appearing
for the appellants, would submit that the absence of
injuries on the person of PW-1 and non-examination of the
Doctor who conducted medical examination of PW-1 punch
holes in the prosecution case inasmuch as casting a shadow
of doubt in respect of commission of rape. He would submit
that, in the aforesaid background, the sole testimony of
PW-1 is not sufficient to sustain the conviction of the
appellants. In aid of his submission, he would place
reliance on the decision of this Court in the case of Rai
Sandeep v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2012) 8 SCC 21 amongst
others. Per contra, Shri C.D. Singh, learned counsel
appearing for the State of Uttar Pradesh would justify the
findings and conclusions reached by Courts below. He would
submit that the testimony of PW-1 is trustworthy and
reliable and thus eliminates the necessity of any
corroboration by other evidence on record. He would further
submit that neither the absence of corroborative testimony
by the Doctor who conducted medical examination of PW-1 nor
4
Page 4the absence of injuries would render the judgment and order
of conviction passed by the Courts below perverse, if the
testimony of PW-1 inspires confidence and reliable. He
would place reliance upon the decision of this Court in
Vijay v. State of M.P., (2010) 8 SCC 191.
8. With the able assistance of both the learned
counsel, we have carefully perused and analyzed the
evidence of the Prosecution Witnesses and, in particular,
the evidence of PW-1. In our opinion, the evidence of the
said witnesses is not only reliable but also trustworthy.
9. This Court has held that if, upon consideration
of the prosecution case in its entirety, the testimony of
the prosecutrix inspires confidence in the mind of the
Court, the necessity of corroboration of her evidence may
be excluded. This Court in Rajinder v. State of Himachal
Pradesh, (2009) 16 SCC 69 has observed as under:
“18. This Court, in State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh,
(1996) 2 SCC 384 made the following weighty
observations in respect of evidence of a victim of
sexual assault: (SCC pp. 395-96, para 8)
“8. … The courts must, while evaluating evidence,
remain alive to the fact that in a case of rape, no
self-respecting woman would come forward in a court
just to make a humiliating statement against her
honour such as is involved in the commission of rape
on her. In cases involving sexual molestation,
5
Page 5supposed considerations which have no material
effect on the veracity of the prosecution case or
even discrepancies in the statement of the
prosecutrix should not, unless the discrepancies are
such which are of fatal nature, be allowed to throw
out an otherwise reliable prosecution case. The
inherent bashfulness of the females and the tendency
to conceal outrage of sexual aggression are factors
which the courts should not overlook. The testimony
of the victim in such cases is vital and unless
there are compelling reasons which necessitate
looking for corroboration of her statement, the
courts should find no difficulty to act on the
testimony of a victim of sexual assault alone to
convict an accused where her testimony inspires
confidence and is found to be reliable. Seeking
corroboration of her statement before relying upon
the same, as a rule, in such cases amounts to adding
insult to injury. Why should the evidence of a girl
or a woman who complains of rape or sexual
molestation, be viewed with doubt, disbelief or
suspicion? The court while appreciating the evidence
of a prosecutrix may look for some assurance of her
statement to satisfy its judicial conscience, since
she is a witness who is interested in the outcome of
the charge levelled by her, but there is no
requirement of law to insist upon corroboration of
her statement to base conviction of an accused. The
evidence of a victim of sexual assault stands almost
on a par with the evidence of an injured witness and
to an extent is even more reliable. Just as a
witness who has sustained some injury in the
occurrence, which is not found to be self-inflicted,
is considered to be a good witness in the sense that
he is least likely to shield the real culprit, the
evidence of a victim of a sexual offence is entitled
to great weight, absence of corroboration
notwithstanding. Corroborative evidence is not an
imperative component of judicial credence in every
case of rape. Corroboration as a condition for
judicial reliance on the testimony of the
prosecutrix is not a requirement of law but a
guidance of prudence under given circumstances. It
must not be overlooked that a woman or a girl
subjected to sexual assault is not an accomplice to
the crime but is a victim of another person's lust
6
Page 6and it is improper and undesirable to test her
evidence with a certain amount of suspicion,
treating her as if she were an accomplice.
Inferences have to be drawn from a given set of
facts and circumstances with realistic diversity and
not dead uniformity lest that type of rigidity in
the shape of rule of law is introduced through a new
form of testimonial tyranny making justice a
casualty. Courts cannot cling to a fossil formula
and insist upon corroboration even if, taken as a
whole, the case spoken of by the victim of sex crime
strikes the judicial mind as probable.”
(emphasis in original)
19. In the context of Indian culture, a woman—victim
of sexual aggression—would rather suffer silently
than to falsely implicate somebody. Any statement of
rape is an extremely humiliating experience for a
woman and until she is a victim of sex crime, she
would not blame anyone but the real culprit. While
appreciating the evidence of the prosecutrix, the
courts must always keep in mind that no self-
respecting woman would put her honour at stake by
falsely alleging commission of rape on her and
therefore, ordinarily a look for corroboration of
her testimony is unnecessary and uncalled for. But
for high improbability in the prosecution case, the
conviction in the case of sex crime may be based on
the sole testimony of the prosecutrix. It has been
rightly said that corroborative evidence is not an
imperative component of judicial credence in every
case of rape nor the absence of injuries on the
private parts of the victim can be construed as
evidence of consent.”
10. The Trial Court, keeping in view the evidence of
PW-1, has come to the conclusion that the accused persons
have committed the offence falling within the parameters of
Section 376 read with Section 34 of the IPC. This view of
the Trial Court is affirmed by the High Court once again
7
Page 7after re-appreciating the entire evidence on record. In
our considered view, neither the Trial Court nor the High
Court has committed any error, whatsoever, which would call
for our interference in these appeals. Accordingly, the
appeals stand dismissed.
Ordered accordingly.
.......................J.
(H.L. DATTU)
.......................J.
(RANJAN GOGOI)
NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 13, 2013
8
Page 8