REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1765-1766 2019
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) Nos.3433-34 of 2019)
V. RAJARAM ...Appellant
VERSUS
STATE REPRESENTED BY THE
INSPECTOR OF POLICE CBI/SCB …Respondent
J U D G M E N T
R. BANUMATHI, J.
Leave granted.
2. These appeals arise out of the judgment and order dated
21.03.2019 and 25.03.2019 passed by the High Court of Madras at
Madurai Bench in Crl.A. (MD) No.274 of 2011 in and by which the
High Court set aside the order of acquittal passed by the Principal
Sessions Judge, Madurai in Sessions Case No.3 of 2009 and
convicted the appellant-accused No.17 under Sections 217 IPC and
221 IPC and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
one year and four years respectively.
3. Brief facts which led to filing of these appeals are as under:-
1On 09.05.2007, the newspaper Dinakaran carried public
opinion results regarding the political heir of the then Chief Minister
M. Karunanidhi which suggested that Mr. M.K. Stalin had greater
public approval as the political successor of M. Karunanidhi than his
elder brother M.K. Alagiri. Protests were staged against the
newspaper by the supporters of M.K. Alagiri before the Dinakaran
office. Around 10:00 a.m., about fifty persons led by Saravanan,
Ex-Secy, Volunteer Wing of DMK came to the office of Dinakaran
Newspaper in vehicles and started causing damage to the glass
panes of the office and they also started breaking the glass doors
with wooden logs. PW-30-Selvaraj-the then Additional
Superintendent of Police and the appellant along with police
personnel came to the spot. Under the command, the police present
there including the appellant used force against the agitators and
chased them away. Again, the said Saravanan came with a group of
people with soda bottles and started pelting the same at the office of
Dinakaran Newspaper. The appellant and other police personnel
used force and chased them away. At 11:45 a.m., the supporters
gathered before the office of Dinakaran Newspaper. A group of
persons (accused Nos.1 to 16) led by V.P. Pandi, S/o Ponnusamy
@ Attack Pandi, came to the office of the Dinakaran Daily in a white
colour Tata Sumo car armed with dandas (sticks) and iron rods.
2They trespassed into the office and set fire to two wheelers parked
inside the compound, near the security office. Thereafter, they
vandalised the Dinakaran premises and proceeded to set on fire the
reception area. The private security guards on duty were no match
to resist the mischief and criminal acts of the miscreants. Three
employees of Dinakaran Newspaper-Vinoth Kumar (Deceased
No.1), Gopinath (Deceased No.2) and Muthuramalingam, security
guard, (Deceased No.3) got stuck in the engulfing fire and have lost
their lives in the said incident. On getting information, M.
Balasubramanian, Fire Station Officer (PW-50) along with a team of
fire service personnel and fire engines went to Dinakaran office at
12 noon and took efforts to douse the fire.
4. On the basis of complaint made by SI-Aladiyan (PW-1), on
09.05.2007, FIR was registered in Othakadai Police Station in Cr.
No.226 of 2007 at 01:00 p.m. under Sections 147, 148, 449, 436,
302, 307, 332 and 120B IPC, under Sections 4 and 5 of the
Explosive Substances Act and under Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu
Property (Prevention of Damage and Loss) Act against accused
No.1-V.P. Pandi @ Attack Pandi and others. Lakshmanan, Inspector
of Police (PW-70) had taken up the initial investigation and sent the
bodies of deceased persons for post-mortem. Dr. G. Natarajan (PW-
363) who conducted the autopsy opined that the cause of death of all
the deceased is suffocation associated with head injuries. PW-70
prepared the observation mahazar (Ex.-P181) and Rough sketch
(Ex.-P219). PW-70-Investigating Officer seized the material objects-
broken glass pieces and burnt two wheelers and other material
objects from the scene of occurrence and proceeded with the
investigation. Investigation of the case was transferred to the CBI
as per notification No.SC/2816-2/2007 dated 10.05.2007 under
Section 6 of Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 issued by
the Government of Tamil Nadu and also notification No.228/25/2007
AVD II under Section 5 of Delhi Special Police Establishment Act. In
pursuance of these notifications, on 18.05.2007, Cr.No.226 of 2007
of Othakadai Police Station was transferred to CBI and re-registered
as R.C.6/S/2007/CBI/SCB/Chennai by CBI and taken up for
investigation. On completion of investigation, charge sheet was filed
on 06.08.2007 against seventeen accused persons. A1 to A16 were
charge-sheeted for the offences punishable under Sections 147,
148, 449, 302 read with Section 149 IPC, 436 read with Section 149
IPC and under Sections 4 and 5 of the Explosive Substances Act
and under Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Property (Prevention of
Damage and Loss) Act. The appellant-accused No.17 who was the
then jurisdictional Deputy Superintendent of Police was charge-
4sheeted for the offences punishable under Sections 217 IPC and
221 IPC.
5. Accused Nos.1 to 16 were charged under Sections 147, 148,
449, 302 read with Section 149 IPC, 436 read with Section 149 IPC
and under Sections 4 and 5 of the Explosive Substances Act and
under Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Property (Prevention of Damage
and Loss) Act. The appellant-accused No.17 was charged for the
offences punishable under Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC.
6. On being questioned, the appellant denied the charges and
pleaded not guilty. Upon consideration of evidence, the trial court
acquitted the appellant by holding that the evidence adduced
against the appellant is not sufficient to prove the charges under
Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC. The trial court noted the submission
of the counsel for the appellant that on the date of occurrence,
appellant was not the superior officer present at the place of
occurrence and that PW-30-Additional Superintendent of Police was
the superior officer and the bandobust was arranged under the head
of PW-30. The trial court held that the prosecution has not proved
that the appellant-accused No.17 intentionally disobeyed the
directions of law and intentionally allowed the accused to escape
from the place of occurrence. Insofar as the sanction for
5prosecution, the trial court held that the Principal Secretary who
issued the sanction order, was not examined and that the
examination of Balakrishnan, Deputy Secretary (PW-67) is not
sufficient to prove the satisfaction of the Principal Secretary who
signed the sanction order-Ex.-P212.
7. In the appeal preferred by CBI, the High Court reversed the
acquittal and convicted 9 out of 16 main accused under Sections
147, 148, 449, 302 read with Section 149 IPC, 436 read with
Section 149 IPC, under Sections 4 and 5 of the Explosive
Substances Act and under Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Property
(Prevention of Damage and Loss) Act. The High Court also
reversed the acquittal of the appellant-accused No.17 and convicted
him under Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC and sentenced him to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and four years
respectively. The High Court held that it has been clearly
established through the evidence of T.S. Anbu, Superintendent of
Police (PW-29) that the police pickets, which were posted for
protecting the Dinakaran office, were headed by Selvaraj (PW-30)
and assisted by the appellant-accused-Rajaram, Deputy
Superintendent of Police. The High Court held that from the
photographs and video footage, it was noticed that the appellant
6was seen going along with accused No.1 and that the appellant did
not take any action to prevent the crime and to apprehend the
criminals. The High Court further held that failure of the CBI to
prosecute Additional Superintendent of Police Selvaraj (PW-30)
cannot absolve the appellant from criminal liability. Observing that
the trial court erred in ignoring the evidence of PW-77-Goutham
Roy, Senior Scientific Officer, Central Forensic Science Laboratory
and in discarding the photographs and videographs, the High Court
allowed the appeal preferred by CBI and reversed the acquittal of
the appellant and convicted and sentenced him to undergo
imprisonment as aforesaid. The revision preferred by one Poongodi,
mother of Vinoth Kumar (Deceased No.1) was closed. The
appellant was questioned on sentence in Crl. A. (MD) No.274 of
2011 i.e. criminal appeal preferred by the CBI. The sentence of
imprisonment was imposed on the appellant in Crl.A. (MD) No.274
of 2011.
8. Mr. V. Giri, learned Senior counsel for the appellant contended
that the High Court has failed to consider that since the Senior
Police Officers viz. Superintendent of Police (PW-29) and Additional
Superintendent of Police (PW-30) were regulating the police
bandobust and giving directions, the appellant cannot be held liable
7for not preventing the crime committed by the accused. It was
further contended that the High Court has committed error in relying
upon the Compact Discs without there being any certification as
required under Section 65-B of the Indian Evidence Act to prove the
same. Learned Senior counsel further submitted that PW-27-Annal-
Photographer of Nakkeeran Bi-weekly Magazine who is said to
have taken video and the photographs and PW-28-Oliraja-News-
reporter of said Nakkeeran Bi-weekly magazine, have turned hostile
and have not supported the case of prosecution and this has not
been kept in view by the High Court. The learned Senior counsel
contended that the High Court erred in reversing the order of
acquittal of the appellant and the High Court did not keep in view
the well settled principle that generally, order of acquittal shall not
be interfered with unless there is erroneous appreciation of
evidence and the judgment of the trial court is perverse.
9. Per contra, Ms. Sonia Mathur, learned Senior counsel
appearing on behalf of the respondent-CBI has supported the
judgment of the High Court and submitted that at the relevant point
of time when the offence was committed, the appellant was In-
charge of the bandobust duty from 09:30 a.m. at the Dinakaran
Newspaper Building and the appellant deliberately did not take any
8action in preventing the mischief and the criminal acts of the
accused. Drawing our attention to the ingredients of Sections 217
IPC and 221 IPC, the learned Senior counsel for the respondent-
CBI has submitted that the appellant who was In-charge of the
bandobust could have easily prevented the attack and the arson
and arrested the accused “Attack Pandi” and other accused when
they went about committing the offence. Learned Senior counsel
further submitted that M.O.45-CD and photographs and six
Compact Discs (M.Os.49 to 54) were sent to Central Forensic
Science Laboratory (CFSL), New Delhi and the evidence of PW-77-
Senior Scientific Officer of CFSL proves that the photographs and
videos in the CD’s are not tampered with and while so, the trial court
erred in discarding the opinion given by the Expert. It was submitted
that the High Court rightly relied upon M.O.45-CD and other
material objects-Compact Discs and the evidence of Expert-PW-77
and the High Court rightly held that there was no tampering of the
Compact Discs and the video CD’s in establishing the role of the
accused person and the failure of the appellant in his lawful duty.
Placing reliance upon Sidhartha Vashisht alias Manu Sharma v.
State (NCT of Delhi) (2010) 6 SCC 1, learned Senior counsel
submitted that in an appeal against acquittal, the High Court has the
power to review the entire evidence and come to its own conclusion
9and reverse the order of acquittal and the paramount consideration
is to prevent the miscarriage of justice. It was submitted that the
High Court has rightly reversed the acquittal and convicted the
appellant and the learned Senior counsel prayed for dismissal of the
appeal.
10. We have carefully considered the above contentions and
perused the impugned judgment, evidence and other materials on
record. The point falling for consideration is whether the judgment of
the trial court qua the appellant was perverse and whether there
were substantial grounds for the High Court to reverse the order of
acquittal of the appellant recorded by the trial court and convict the
appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 217 IPC and
221 IPC.
11. Appellant was the then jurisdictional Deputy Superintendent of
Police. The appellant was arrayed as accused No.17 and was
charged for the offences punishable under Sections 217 IPC and
221 IPC alleging that the appellant who was on bandobust duty, did
not take effective steps to prevent the crime and to apprehend the
criminals on the spot and thus, alleged to have acted in aid of the
accused. The allegation against the appellant (who was the Deputy
Superintendent of Police, Oomachikulam Sub-Division at the
10relevant point of time) is that despite being present at the time of
incident in Dinakaran office and despite having a team of thirty-nine
police personnel with two rifles, fifty live rounds and other arms and
accessories, apart from accessories like helmet, shields, lathis, etc.
posted for bandobust duty at Dinakaran newspaper premises, he
did not take effective steps to prevent the crime. Further allegation
against the appellant is that he deliberately refrained from issuing
orders to thirty-nine police personnel present at the spot to prevent
the incident and no step was taken to apprehend the miscreants,
rather the appellant intentionally omitted to apprehend the
miscreants despite the fact that they committed various cognizable
offences in his presence and alleged to have intentionally aided
them in escaping from the place of occurrence.
12. PW-2-A. Muthupandiyan, News Editor of Dinakaran
Newspaper in Madurai has stated that on 09.05.2007, Dinakaran
Newspaper has published an opinion poll regarding the political heir
of M. Karunanidhi as to “Who is the political heir of Karunanidhi?”,
which created furore. PW-2 has stated that in the morning of
09.05.2007, a huge group of people came to Dinakaran Newspaper
office and attacked and damaged the office building and that he
started evacuating the women staff to safety and also tried to
11protect the computers and other important items inside the office.
PW-2 has also stated that Dinakaran office was set fire and that he
called the fire service immediately and also complained to the
Othakkadai Police Station and asked the police to give protection to
their employees and the office. PW-2 has stated that he has also
informed about this attack to PW-3-R.M.R. Ramesh, Chief
Operating Officer of Dinakaran in Chennai. PW-2 has further stated
that since the police did not take any action for giving protection, he
obtained the mobile number of the appellant standing outside and
asked PW-3 to talk to the appellant. PW-2 further stated that PW-3-
Chief Operating Officer has spoken to the appellant and that he
does not know what they had talked and later, PW-3 has spoken to
another DSP, Kalifullah Khan.
13. PW-3-R.M.R. Ramesh who has been working as Chief
Operating Officer of Dinakaran Newspaper, Head office at Chennai
has stated that PW-2-Muthupandiyan had called him at 09:00 a.m.
on 09.05.2007 and informed him about the attack on Dinakaran
Newspaper office. PW-3 has also stated that on being informed by
PW-2, he spoke to the appellant who was standing outside the
office and the appellant told him that their police group was on their
way and the action would be taken immediately. PW-3 further stated
12that since he was informed that more people started entering their
office, he again called the appellant and requested him to take
action at once. PW-3 further stated that the appellant informed him
that he has not yet received any order from his superiors and that
PW-3 obtained the number of another DSP, Kalifullah Khan and he
spoke to the said DSP who told PW-3 that he would supply more
police personnel to bolster up security since more people were
inside. PW-3 further stated that by that time it was 11:00 a.m. and
he was informed by PW-2 that the entire reception was in flames
and that he asked PW-2 to ensure protection of the employees
and the machines. PW-3 also stated that by 01:00 p.m., PW-2
called him and told him that the entire office building was engulfed
in flames and that two employees have lost their lives by the
billowing smoke cloud and that he informed the Chairman,
Dinakaran and immediately, they went to Madurai by flight.
Submissions regarding M.O.45-CD, photographs and the
Compact Discs (M.Os. 49 to 54)
14. CBI collected M.O.45-CD containing thirty-one photographs
which are said to have been taken by PW-27-Annal who has been
then working as the Photographer of Nakkeeran Bi-weekly
Magazine. M.Os. 49 to 54-Compact Discs are said to have been
handed over to CBI by PW-2-Muthupandiyan, News Editor of
13Dinakaran Office. The Investigating Officer has stated that six
Compact Discs-M.Os. 49 to 54 were handed over to him by PW-2;
but PW-2 denied handing over of M.Os. 49 to 54. As seen from the
evidence of PW-77, Senior Scientific Officer of CFSL, Compact
Discs-M.Os.49 to 54 and M.O.45 were sent to the Laboratory. In his
report, PW-77 gave his opinion that “original photographs and
videographs look strong in resolution”. In his evidence, PW-77 has
stated that none of the photographs are tampered and all the
photographs and videographs are original because of its strong
resolution.
15. PW-28-Olirajan has been working as the Madurai News-
reporter of Nakkeeran Bi-weekly Magazine and PW-27-Annal has
been working as the Photographer of Nakkeeran Bi-weekly
Magazine. Case of the prosecution is that PWs 27 and 28 have
covered the incident that happened in Dinakaran office on
09.05.2007 and they have reported the news to their Magazine and
sent the photos to their Chennai Head Office. PWs 27 and 28 have
denied going to the spot and covering the incident. PW-27 has
stated that on 09.05.2007, he was suffering from stomach pain and
that he went to the Dinakaran office only at 02:00 p.m. and saw
some demonstration and protest going on. PW-27 has thus, only
14stated about the demonstration that were going on in Dinakaran
office at 02:00 pm and that he took the photos of it and sent the
same to the Head Office. Likewise, PW-28 who was then working
as the News-reporter in Nakkeeran Bi-weekly Magazine has stated
that at the time of occurrence, he did not go to the place of
occurrence and he did not collect any news. But PWs 27 and 28
have thus, turned hostile and have not supported the case of
prosecution.
16. PW-75-Nakkeeran Gopal is the Editor and Publisher of
Nakkeeran Bi-weekly Magazine. In his evidence, PW-75 has stated
that PWs 27 and 28 are the persons collecting news for the Bi-
weekly Magazine in Madurai and they used to send the news and
photos to their Head Office. PW-75 has stated that at the time of
CBI enquiry, as per the request of Investigating Officer (CBI), he has
handed over M.O.45-CD to the Investigating Officer. PW-75 has
also stated that in M.O.45-CD, thirty-one photographs were
recorded. PW-26-Kamaraj, Joint Editor in Nakkeeran Magazine at
Chennai had also stated about PWs 27 and 28 having been
engaged by their Magazine in Madurai and that they used to collect
news and photos and send it to their Head Office. PWs 26 and 75
have stated about the receipt of news and photographs of the
15occurrence that took place in Dinakaran office and the photographs
and news published in their Magazine; but PWs 26 and 75 have
admitted that they have not taken the photographs and they do not
know personally about the news or the photographs taken.
17. Mr. V. Giri, learned Senior counsel for the appellant has raised
objection regarding M.O.45-CD and six Compact Discs (M.Os.49 to
54) and that the same are not admissible. Learned Senior counsel
contended that M.O.45 and M.Os.49 to 54 are not primary evidence
and the same should have been proved in accordance with Section
65-B of the Indian Evidence Act. Reliance was placed upon Anvar
P.V. v. P.K. Basheer and Others (2014) 10 SCC 473 to contend that
electronic evidence, by way of secondary evidence, shall not be
admitted in evidence unless the requirements under Section 65-B of
the Evidence Act are satisfied. Learned Senior counsel has also
drawn our attention to Shafhi Mohammad v. State of Himachal
Pradesh (2018) 2 SCC 801 and submitted that in Shafhi
Mohammad, after referring to Anwar case, two Judges Bench has
distinguished the decision and in para (29) of the judgment, it was
observed that the requirement of a certificate under Section 65-B(4)
of the Evidence Act is not always mandatory. Learned Senior
counsel further submitted that the decision in Shafhi Mohammad
16however, has been referred to a larger Bench on 26.07.2019 in C.A
Nos.20825-20826 of 2017.
18. Learned Senior counsel for the respondent-CBI has submitted
that the evidence of PW-77, Senior Scientific Officer of CFSL
establishes the truthfulness of the videographs and the photographs
and that in his evidence, PW-77 made it clear that the photographs,
M.O.45-CD and the Compact Discs-M.Os.49 to 54 were original and
that they were not tampered with. Placing reliance upon Sonu alias
Amar v. State of Haryana (2017) 8 SCC 570, learned Senior
counsel submitted that under Section 65-B of the Indian Evidence
Act, at the time of admitting the material objects, the accused did
not take any objection before the trial court with regard to the
requirement of Section 65-B(4) certification. It was submitted that
any objection regarding the admission of documents/material
objects should be taken at the stage of trial and at the time of
marking of documents as an exhibit and not later.
19. Placing reliance upon Shafhi Mohammad case, learned
Senior counsel submitted that a piece of evidence/material objects
should not be kept out of Court’s consideration on the ground that
certificate under Section 65-B(4) is unavailable because, the
ultimate objective of a criminal prosecution is to arrive at the truth.
17Learned Senior counsel therefore, submitted that though the
certification under Section 65-B(4) is not available, by considering
the evidence of PW-77-Senior Scientific Officer of CFSL, the
Compact Discs were rightly taken into consideration by the High
Court to prove the criminal acts of the accused and the act of the
appellant in not acting diligently.
20. For reversing the order of acquittal of the appellant, the High
Court referred to M.O.45-CD, photographs and M.Os.49 to 54.
M.O.45-CD, photographs and the news published in Nakkeeran
Magazine and other evidence were relied upon by the prosecution.
As pointed out earlier, PW-2, News Editor of Dinakaran office has
denied handing over of six Compact Discs-M.Os. 49 to 54 to the
Investigating Officer. The Investigating Officer in his evidence has
stated that PW-2 has handed over six Compact Discs-M.Os. 49 to
54. The High Court referred to the report of PW-77, Senior Scientific
Officer of CFSL and held that the evidence of PW-77 shows that the
photos and the videos have not been doctored. Referring to
M.O.45-CD and other material objects-Compact Discs, the High
Court observed that the trial court erred in brushing aside the video
footage and the photos contained in the Compact Discs on a
presumptuous ground that the same could have been doctored and
18that the said approach of the trial court is perverse. On such
findings, the High Court reversed the acquittal of all the accused
and also the acquittal of the appellant-accused No.17. Since the
appeals against other accused convicted under Section 302 IPC are
admitted and pending before the Supreme Court, we do not
propose to go into the merits of the contentions regarding M.O.45-
CD, photographs and other Compact Discs-M.Os.49 to 54. Lest, it
might affect the interest of the parties in other criminal appeals
which are pending before in the Supreme Court. We therefore,
consciously refrain from expressing our views on the contentions
regarding M.O.45-CD and other Compact Discs (MOs.49 to 54) and
the photographs and other electronic evidence relied upon by the
prosecution and the news published in Nakkeeran Bi-weekly
Magazine.
21. The appellant has been convicted for the offences punishable
under Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC. At the relevant time, the
appellant was the Deputy Superintendent of Police of the
jurisdictional Division. The allegation against the appellant is that he
disobeyed the laws with intention to save the accused from legal
punishment and also intentionally allowed the accused to escape
from the place of occurrence and therefore, he is charged for the
19offences punishable under Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC. In the
light of the oral evidence adduced, it is to be seen whether the
prosecution has proved the charges against the appellant under
Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC and whether the High Court was
right in reversing the order of acquittal of the appellant.
22. Section 217 IPC deals with disobedience on the part of public
servants in respect of official duty. To prove the charges under
Section 217 IPC, the following ingredients must be proved:-
(i) there must be an intentional disobedience of law by a
public servant; and
(ii) such disobedience must be with intention to save, or
knowledge that he will thereby (a) save a person from
legal punishment; or (b) save any property from
forfeiture or charge to which it is liable by law.
Section 221 IPC deals with omission to apprehend the offenders or
suffering the escape of the offenders. To prove the charges under
Section 221 IPC, the prosecution must prove:-
(i) that the accused is a public servant;
(ii) that the person in question had been charged with an
offence; or that such person was liable to be
apprehended for an offence;
(iii) that the accused was legally bound to apprehend such
person for the same;
that he omitted to apprehend; that he did so
(iv)
intentionally.
2023. In the light of the oral evidence adduced by the prosecution, it
is to be seen whether the High Court was right in holding that the
appellant could have easily prevented the incident and the arson
and arrested the accused “Attack Pandi” and his group when they
went about committing the cognizable offences.
24. Ex.-P82 is the bandobust duty list as ordered by PW-29-T.S.
Anbu, Superintendent of Police. As per Ex.-P82, police officials
were present in the place of occurrence for bandobust and PW-30-
Selvaraj-Additional Superintendent of Police, a superior officer of
the appellant, is mentioned at serial No.1. PW-1-Sub-Inspector of
Police has stated that on the date of occurrence, bandobust was
under the leadership of PW-30-Selvaraj, Additional Superintendent
of Police who came to the place of occurrence with striking force
and they chased the agitators along with the appellant. PW-1 has
also stated that police personnel were divided into seven groups
and were directed to be on bandobust duty on seven points. SI-PW-
1 has stated that about ten persons of Madurai Armed Reserve
Police Force came in a single vehicle and that the appellant had
asked that the vehicle to be parked away safely and asked the
police force that they should be scattered sparsely without standing
together at one place. In his chief examination, PW-1 has also
21stated that all of them along with the appellant and other police
personnel had used force on the agitators and they chased away
the agitators. PW-1 also stated that the appellant was informing
about the development in the place of occurrence then and there
through wireless to PW-29, Superintendent of Police. In his cross-
examination on behalf of the appellant, PW-1-SI-Aladiyan has
stated as under:-
“The security was organized on that day under the charge of
Mr. Selvaraj, the Additional Superintendent……The DSP was
standing near his vehicle to relay the developments happening
there to the S.P. through wireless communication…..To state that
our vehicles were parked at a distance so as not to create traffic
jam is correct. To state that on that day the police security services
were well executed is correct”.
As per Ex.-P82 and from the evidence of PW-1, it is seen that thus
the appellant was not the senior most officer present at the scene of
occurrence to issue directions; PW-30-Additional Superintendent of
Police was the higher officer present there who was to issue
directions and the appellant was to act under the direction and
guidance of PW-30-Additional Superintendent of Police.
25. PW-2-Muthupandiyan has been working as News Editor of
Dinakaran Newspaper in Madurai. In his examination-in-chief, PW-2
has deposed that he has informed about the attack to PW-3-R.M.R.
Ramesh, Chief Operating Officer (COO) of Dinakaran in Chennai
22and PW-3 has requested the police to give security and stop the
attacks. In his chief-examination, PW-2 has stated as under:-
“Even when asking the police for giving protection, they did not
take any action standing witness to the incident. Therefore, I had
gathered the mobile phone number of the DSP Mr. Rajaram
standing out and asked our COO to talk to him. DSP Mr. Rajaram is
the 17th accused in this case. Our COO has talked to the DSP Mr.
Rajaram on his phone. I do not know what they had talked. Later,
COO has talked to another DSP Mr. Kalifullah Khan too”.
In his cross-examination on behalf of the appellant, PW-2 has
stated that he requested the appellant Rajaram to take action. PW-2
was treated hostile by the prosecution. In his cross-examination
from the prosecution side, PW-2 denied having told the police that
when he asked the appellant to take action, the appellant-Rajaram
told him that “he could not take any action and there is no such
necessity to do so……”.
26. PW-3-R.M.R. Ramesh, Chief Operating Officer of Dinakaran
has deposed that PW-2-Muthupandiyan told him that more and
more people are entering inside the office and that PW-2 gave him
the telephone number of the appellant who was standing outside
the office and that he (PW-3) immediately called the appellant over
phone and the appellant told him that the police were on their way
and that action would be taken immediately. PW-3-Chief Operating
Officer of Dinakaran office has further stated that since more people
23started entering the office, he called the appellant again and
requested him to take action at once. According to PW-3, the
appellant replied as under:-
“……he has not received any order yet from his superiors. I
requested him to provide the telephone number of his immediate
higher authority. He gave me the telephone number of DSP Mr.
Kalifulla Khan. I called up DSP Mr. Kalifulla Khan and he told me
that he would supply more police personnel to bolster up security
since more people were inside. By that time, it was 11.00 a.m.
…...”.
From the evidence of PWs 2 and 3, it is seen that the appellant
immediately responded to them by stating that action would be
taken at once and that he has not received any order from his
superiors. The evidence of PWs 2 and 3 shows that the appellant
was taking action and there was no lack of diligence on his part.
27. PW-29-T.S. Anbu, then Superintendent of Police (Rural) of
Madurai District has stated about the issuance of order (Ex.-P82) for
providing security to Dinakaran office. In his evidence, PW-29 has
stated that he has deputed a total of 41 persons comprising of
PW-30-Selvaraj, Additional Superintendent of Police, the appellant-
DSP, Inspectors, Sub-Inspectors and the Police Constables. In his
cross-examination on behalf of the appellant, PW-29 has stated as
under:-
24“As per P.W. Ex.82, the higher official dispatched for giving security
and protection was S.P. Selvaraj. If any such officer wants to leave
that place assigned to him, he has to get my permission. Mr.
Selvaraj who was assigned to this duty did not get any such
permission from me. If he did not get my permission that will mean
that he was doing his duty assigned to him. The higher authority of
that security group is responsible for that group…..”.
From the evidence of PW-29 and Ex.-P82, it is clear that PW-30
was the higher officer placed as In-charge of the security.
28. In his evidence, PW-30-Selvaraj, Additional Superintendent of
Police has stated that about 35 police personnel along with the
appellant were engaged in bandobust duty and at about 11:18 a.m.
since there was no further law and order problem, he went to the
High Court and at about 11:40 a.m., he noticed the smoke coming
out from Dinakaran office and immediately, he rushed to the place
of occurrence. PW-30 further stated that he enquired the appellant
about the measures taken to put off the fire and that the appellant
informed that fire brigade had already been informed. As pointed
out earlier, in his cross-examination, as per the evidence of PW-29-
Superintendent of Police and Ex.-P82, the higher official dispatched
for giving security and protection was PW-30-Additional
Superintendent of Police. When there was agitation near Dinakaran
office, it is not known as to why PW-30 left for the High Court.
25Having been deputed to be on duty near Dinakaran office, if PW-30
wanted to leave the place of duty assigned to him, he ought to have
taken the permission from his superior officer. Nothing has come on
record that PW-30 has taken any such permission from PW-29 for
going to the High Court. In cross-examination, PW-29-
Superintendent of Police has stated that PW-30 did not get
permission from him to leave the place and go to the High Court.
29. As held by the trial court, Ex.-P82 and the evidence of PW-29-
Superintendent of Police would show that the bandobust at the
Dinakaran office was posted under the control of PW-30 and the
appellant was acting under the direction of PW-30. The trial court
has rightly pointed out that PW-30-Additional Superintendent of
Police is shown at serial No.1 in Ex.-P82 and what kind of action to
be taken is to be decided by the superior officer. From the evidence,
it is brought on record that the appellant and other police personnel
have used force and chased away the agitators. The High Court
found that though the appellant was present at the place of
occurrence, the accused committed the offence in his presence and
he has not apprehended the accused. As discussed earlier, from
the evidence it has come on record that the police on bandobust
including the appellant have chased the agitators. From the
26evidence of PW-1-Sub-Inspector of Police, it is seen that the
appellant and the other police officers have taken action and also
used force in chasing away the agitators. Further from the evidence
of PW-2-News Editor of Dinakaran office and PW-3-Chief Operating
Officer of Dinakaran office, it is seen that the appellant immediately
responded to them by stating that he has not received any order
from his superiors and that action would be taken immediately. The
evidence of PWs 2 and 3 shows that there was no lack of diligence
on the part of the appellant.
30. The evidence of PW-29 and Ex.-P82 clearly show that PW-30-
Additional Superintendent of Police was the officer In-charge of the
security bandobust. The appellant, who was the Deputy
Superintendent of Police at the relevant time was under the
supervision and control of PW-30. In his evidence, PW-30 has not
stated anything about the appellant having disobeyed his orders. In
order to attract the ingredients of Section 217 IPC, there should
have been disobedience of the direction of law with intention to
save the accused. The prosecution has not adduced any evidence
to show that the appellant-accused has disobeyed the direction of
law or the direction of the superior officer-PW-30 or acted with the
intention of saving the accused.
2731. While it may be true that at the time of incident near
Dinakaran office i.e. on 09.05.2007 between 11-12:00 a.m., the
situation became worse, at the same time, it has come on record
that the police were taking action to chase the agitators. In the light
of such evidence, it cannot be said that there was inaction or
negligence on the part of the appellant. In a tense situation where
there is law and order problem, normally a superior gives out
instructions on how to handle a situation and the subordinates are
expected to carry them out. If each subordinate police officer start
taking actions on his own without order from the superior officer, it
would lead to chaos and confusion. Responsibility for the actions
lies with the superior: in the present case, PW-30-Additional
Superintendent of Police. There is nothing on record to show that
the appellant disobeyed the orders of PW-30 who was the officer
placed In-charge of the bandobust nor there was any lack of
diligence and inaction on the part of the appellant to sustain the
conviction of the appellant under Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC.
32. As pointed out earlier, one of the essential ingredients to
make out the offence under Section 217 IPC is that the public
servant should have disobeyed any directions of law with the
intention to save any person from legal punishment. In the present
28case, there is no evidence to show that the appellant has disobeyed
the directions of any law. On the contrary, there is clear evidence to
show that the appellant, PW-1-Sub-Inspector of Police and other
police personnel have used mild force against the miscreants and
thus, chased them away to prevent any further untoward incident.
Absolutely, there is no evidence to show that the appellant did not
obey the command of PW-30 or PW-29-Superintendent of Police
who were present on the spot for issuing directions and commands.
There is no evidence to prove that the appellant omitted to do any
act to sustain the conviction under Section 217 IPC.
33. Insofar as the conviction under Section 221 IPC is concerned,
one of the essential ingredients of Section 221 IPC is the intentional
omission to apprehend a person or intentionally aiding such person
to escape. PW-29-Superintendent of Police and PW-30-Additional
Superintendent of Police who were present on the spot issued
directions and accordingly, the appellant acted. After the occurrence
was over, PW-29 directed the appellant to search for the accused.
Accordingly, the appellant went in search of the accused and
arrested accused No.1 (V.P. Pandi @ Attack Pandi) on 15.05.2007;
accused No.2 (M. Thiruchelvam) on 16.05.2007 and accused Nos.3
and 4 (Prabhu @ Arockiyaprabu and M. Saravanamuthu) on
10.05.2007. There is no evidence to show that the appellant
29intentionally omitted to apprehend the accused on the spot to
sustain the conviction under Section 221 IPC.
34. Upon appreciation of evidence and considering the
ingredients of Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC, the trial court
acquitted the appellant. When the trial court has recorded the
finding that the ingredients of Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC are not
made out which is a plausible view, the High Court could not have
substituted its views with the conclusion of the trial court. So far as
the appellant is concerned, the prosecution has not proved his guilt
and the conviction of the appellant cannot be sustained. In our
considered view, the High Court was not right in reversing the order
of acquittal passed by the trial court and the impugned judgment
qua the appellant is not sustainable and the appellant is acquitted.
35. Mr. B. Balaji, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant has submitted that because of the criminal case, the
appellant has not been paid the pension and other retiral benefits
and prayed for appropriate directions. Since the conviction of the
appellant is set aside and he is acquitted of the charges, the
appellant is at liberty to work out his remedy in accordance with law.
The concerned authorities shall take note of the acquittal of the
appellant.
3036. The appellant was charged for the offences punishable under
Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC alleging that he disobeyed the laws
with intention to save the accused and that he was not diligent in
apprehending the accused. Upon consideration of oral evidence
adduced by the prosecution, we have held that the charges against
the appellant under Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC are not proved
and the conviction of the appellant has been set aside and the
appellant is acquitted. The appellant is not in any way involved in
the main occurrence. The very charge against the appellant for
which he was tried is different and distinct from the charge for which
the other accused were tried. Hence, the instant appeal was heard
separately. The other accused who have been convicted under
Section 302 IPC and other offences have preferred appeals and
those appeals are pending before the Supreme Court. The appeals
preferred by the other accused shall be considered on their own
merits and the findings in these appeals shall not have a bearing
one way or the other in those appeals.
37. In the result, the impugned judgment and order dated
21.03.2019 and 25.03.2019 passed by the High Court of Madras at
Madurai Bench in Crl.A. (MD) No.274 of 2011 convicting the
appellant-accused No.17 under Sections 217 IPC and 221 IPC are
31set aside and these appeals are allowed and the appellant is
acquitted of the aforesaid charges.
…………………….J.
[R. BANUMATHI]
…………………….J.
[A.S. BOPANNA]
New Delhi;
November 26, 2019.
32