REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1421 OF 2015
NAND LAL AND OTHERS ...APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
THE STATE OF CHHATTISGARH ...RESPONDENT(S)
WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1470 OF 2017
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. OF 2023
(Arising out of SLP(Criminal) Nos. 6134-6135 of 2019)
J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1. Leave granted in SLP(Criminal) Nos. 6134-6135 of 2019.
2. These appeals assail the judgment and order dated 11th
November 2014 passed by the Division Bench of the High
Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur, thereby dismissing the
appeals filed by the appellants herein and confirming the
judgment and order dated 24th May 2008 passed by the
Second Additional Sessions Judge, Baloda Bazar, District
1Raipur, Chhattisgarh (hereinafter referred to as “the trial
court”), convicting the appellants along with other accused
for the offences punishable under Section 302 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “IPC”) along with other offences
and sentencing them to undergo life imprisonment.
3. The prosecution story, in brief, as could be gathered
from the material placed on record, is thus:
On the night of 3rd November 2006, at around 07.30
PM, Naresh Kumar, accused No. 11 had assaulted Atmaram
(PW-1). After the said assault, Atmaram (PW-1) went to the
Police Station, Suhela for lodging a report. Thereafter,
Naresh Kumar, accused No.11 along with other accused, who
were armed with deadly weapons, formed an unlawful
assembly, entered the house of deceased Kartikram and
assaulted him as well as Mangtin Bai (PW-2) and Khomlal
(PW-9). As a result of the said assault, Kartikram died on the
spot. Thereafter, Mangtin Bai (PW-2), Khomlal (PW-9) and
Purnima Bai (PW-13), wife, son and daughter-in-law of
deceased Kartikram respectively, along with neighbours
Baliram Sahu (PW-3) and Jeevan Lal Sahu (PW-6) went in a
2tractor to Baloda Bazar to see a doctor, who refused to treat
them unless a report was lodged at the police station.
Thereafter, a jeep was hired and they went to the Police
Station, Suhela. On the basis of the oral report (Ex. P-9), a
merg report (Ex. P-10) came to be registered. Subsequently,
the First Information Report (for short, “FIR”) came to be
registered.
4. On the basis of the said FIR, Inspector Kamal Singh
(PW-14), Investigating Officer (IO) conducted the
investigation. After conclusion of the investigation, a charge-
sheet came to be filed against 12 accused persons before the
Judicial Magistrate First Class, Baloda Bazar. Since the case
was exclusively triable by the Sessions Judge, the same was
committed to the Sessions Court.
5. The learned Trial Judge, vide judgment and order dated
24th May 2008, convicted all the accused persons as
aforesaid. The Division Bench of the High Court, vide
judgment and order dated 11th November 2014, dismissed
the appeals filed by the accused persons. Challenging the
same, four appeals were filed before this Court, being
3Criminal Appeal No. 1421 of 2015 by Nand Lal, Bhagwat and
Ramdular, accused No. 8 to 10 respectively; Criminal Appeal
No. 1422 of 2015 by Paltan Jangde, accused No. 12;
Criminal Appeal No. 1470 of 2017 by Charandas Jangde,
Chhannu Jangde and Charnu Jangde, accused Nos. 5 to 7
respectively; and appeals arising out of SLP (Criminal) Nos.
6134-6135 of 2019, which were filed by Tulsi Jangde, Suresh
Jangde, Dinesh Jangde, Rupesh Jangde and Naresh Kumar,
accused Nos. 1 to 4 and 11 respectively.
6. During the pendency of the appeals, Paltan Jangde,
accused No.12 has died and as such, the said appeal, being
Criminal Appeal No. 1422 of 2015, has abated, vide this
Court’s order dated 13th January 2023. Tulsi Jangde,
Suresh Jangde, Dinesh Jangde, Rupesh Jangde, Channu
Jangde and Charnu Jangde, appellants in appeals arising
out of SLP(Criminal) Nos.6134-6135 of 2019, and Charandas
Jangde, appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 1470 of 2017, have
already been released on completion of their sentence. As
such, we are concerned with the appellants in Criminal
Appeal No. 1421 of 2015 and Naresh Kumar, one of the
4appellants in appeals arising out of SLP(Criminal) Nos.6134-
6135 of 2019.
7. We have heard Shri Vikas Upadhyay, learned counsel
appearing on behalf of accused Nos. 8 to 10, Shri Renjith B.
Marar, learned amicus curiae and Shri Sumeer Sodhi,
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-State.
8. Shri Upadhyay submits that the names of accused Nos.
8 to 10, i.e., Nand Lal, Bhagwat and Ramdular, have not
been mentioned in any of the contemporaneous documents
like the merg panchnama, inquest panchnama and spot
panchnama. He submits that, whereas the names of all
other accused have been specifically mentioned in the
aforesaid documents, there is no mention of the names of
accused Nos. 8 to 10 in these documents. It is for the first
time that the names of these three accused appear in the
FIR. The learned counsel submits that though the incident
had occurred at 08.30 PM on 3rd November 2006, the FIR
was alleged to have been lodged at 03.10 AM on 4th
November 2006, which creates a doubt that the FIR is a
fabricated document and the original FIR has been
5suppressed by the prosecution. He further submits that the
inordinate delay in registering the FIR has also not been
explained by the prosecution. The learned counsel submits
that all the three witnesses i.e., Mangtin Bai (PW-2), Khomlal
(PW-9) and Purnima Bai (PW-13) are interested witnesses. It
is further submitted that the evidence of these three
witnesses is also inconsistent. The learned Counsel,
therefore, submits that the conviction was purely on the
basis of such interested witnesses, whose testimony is not
cogent and trustworthy, and is not sustainable unless there
is some corroboration of their testimony.
9. Shri Upadhyay submits that, in any case, all the three
eye witnesses, i.e., Mangtin Bai (PW-2), Khomlal (PW-9) and
Purnima Bai (PW-13) have made only omnibus allegations
against the appellants herein and no specific overt act
attributable to the present appellants is mentioned. The
learned counsel further submits that the incident happened
at night and it is also admitted that there was a power cut.
As such, the testimonies of all the three witnesses that they
had seen the incident in the moonlight and in the light of a
6lamp cannot be said to be trustworthy. It is further
submitted that, since PW-9 himself had admitted that he had
hidden himself in a grain-store (kothi), it is improbable that
he has witnessed the incident.
10. Shri Marar submits that as a matter of fact, Naresh
Kumar, accused No. 11 has received grievous injuries. It is
submitted that PW-14, IO has admitted that Naresh Kumar,
accused No. 11 had injuries on his head, ankle of left leg and
the middle finger of his right hand. He submitted that even
the Trial Court has found that accused No.11 Naresh Kumar
had received grievous injuries and that he had gone to Police
Station, Suhela to lodge the report. He lodged the report at
the said Police Station and, thereafter, he was sent to
Bhatapara Hospital for treatment. It is submitted that the
prosecution has not explained the injuries received by
accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar. It is submitted that, in any
case, the prosecution has suppressed the information
received from accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar. It is further
submitted that it is improbable that accused No. 11 Naresh
Kumar, after receiving such grievous injuries, could have
7taken part in the assault against the deceased and PWs 2, 9
and 13.
11. Shri Sodhi, on the contrary, submits that all the three
eye witnesses have clearly implicated all the appellants. It is
submitted that PWs 2 and 9 have specifically implicated the
present appellants. It is submitted that all the three
witnesses are rustic villagers. Therefore, merely because
there are some discrepancies in their evidence cannot be a
ground to reject their testimonies. He further submits that
merely because the witnesses are interested witnesses
cannot be a ground to discard their testimonies, if their
evidence is found to be trustworthy, reliable and cogent.
Shri Sodhi submits that, in any case, the witnesses are
injured witnesses and as such, their presence at the spot
cannot be disputed. It is further submitted that merely
because there is some delay in lodging the FIR, it cannot be a
ground to discard the prosecution case, which has been
proved beyond reasonable doubt.
12. Shri Sodhi, relying on various judgments of this Court,
submits that for a conviction under Section 302 of the IPC
8with the aid of Section 149 of the IPC, what is relevant is
whether the accused was a member of unlawful assembly,
and not whether he actually took active part in the crime or
not. He further submits that mere non-explanation of
injuries on the person of the accused would not be fatal to
the prosecution case.
13. With the assistance of learned counsel for the parties,
we have examined the material placed on record.
14. From the medical evidence, it cannot be disputed that
the death of deceased Kartikram is homicidal. The injuries on
PWs 2 and 9 are also not seriously disputed by the
appellants.
15. From the evidence of prosecution witnesses, it can be
seen that the incident has taken place in two parts. The first
part is with regard to the assault on Atmaram (PW-1) by
accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar, whereas the second part is
with regard to the assault by the accused persons on the
deceased and PWs 2, 9 and 13. Atmaram (PW-1), in his
evidence, states that on 3rd November 2006, when he was at
his house, accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar came to his home
9and started abusing him. PW-1 stated that accused No. 11
Naresh Kumar was under the influence of liquor. Accused
No. 11 Naresh Kumar told PW-1 that he had gone to his
house to make a complaint and he had extorted an amount
of Rs.5,000/- from him after plying him with alcohol.
Thereafter, accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar started assaulting
PW-1 with the lathi in his hand. Then, PW-1 states that
accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar left his place with a threat
that he would return along with other members of his family.
It is further stated by Atmaram (PW-1) that, thereafter, he
went to lodge a report to Suhela Police Station along with his
wife, son and daughter.
16. Atmaram (PW-1) further stated that when he returned
from the Police Station, his son came and told him that PW-
1’s father was murdered and PW-1 again went to the Police
Station to lodge the report. As such, it is clear that PW-1 is
not an eye witness to the second incident.
17. Mangtin Bai (PW-2) is the wife of the deceased
Kartikram. She, in her evidence, stated that all the accused
persons had entered her house and started abusing them.
10Her husband was in the TV room. All the accused persons
started assaulting her husband in the said TV room.
Thereafter, they came to the second room where nobody was
there. Her son had hidden himself in a dhan kothi. The
accused persons went there and started assaulting her son.
Thereafter, she went to inform her neighbour, Jeevan Lal
Sahu (PW-6). She, along with PWs 9 and 13, then went by a
tractor to Baloda Bazar. They could not get treatment there
since no report had been lodged with the police. They took a
jeep from there and went to Suhela Police Station. From
there, they were taken to Bhatapara Hospital for treatment.
18. In the cross-examination of Mangtin Bai (PW-2), on
being asked as to whether she knows the relatives of the
accused persons present in the court, she stated that she
knows them but she cannot name them.
19. Khomlal (PW-9) is the injured son of the deceased
Kartikram. His evidence is also of similar nature. He, too,
testifies about the earlier incident pertaining to Atmaram
(PW-1). He states that after Atmaram (PW-1) went to the
Police Station at around 08.30 PM, all the accused persons
11came to his house. He states that all the accused persons
entered the room of his father and started assaulting his
father. He, therefore, went to hide himself in the dhan kothi.
The accused persons came there and assaulted him and
thus, he received severe injuries. Thereafter, they went to
Baloda Bazar for treatment. However, the doctor refused to
treat them. As such, they went to Suhela Police Station and
lodged the report. In his cross-examination, he admits that
in the merg report lodged by him, there is no mention of
Nand Lal, Bhagwant and Ramdular, i.e., accused Nos. 8 to
10 respectively. Though he states that he had informed the
police of all the details, it is only the police who can say why
the names of the aforesaid three appellants are not there.
20. Purnima (PW-13), wife of Khomal (PW-9), also states
that Atmaram (PW-1) was going to the Police Station to lodge
a report at around 7:00 PM. She states that, between 8:00
PM to 8:30 PM, the accused persons, viz. Charandad Jangde,
Tulsi Jangde, Charnu Jangde, Bhagwat and others, came to
their house, where they first assaulted her mother-in-law,
Mangtin Bai (PW-2), with a stick. Thereafter she repeats the
12same version as given by Mangtin Bai (PW-2) and Khomlal
(PW-9).
21. In his statement recorded under Section 313 of the
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for short, “Cr. P.C.”),
accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar specifically stated that he had
received grievous injuries after he was assaulted by Atmaram
(PW-1) and, thereafter, he went to the Police Station with
accused No. 7 Charnu Jangde, accused No. 12 Paltan
Jangde, Ashwini and Vinod, from where he was sent to
Bhatapara Hospital for treatment.
22. It will be pertinent to refer to the medical examination of
accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar conducted by Dr. Anita Verma
(PW-10). The injuries sustained by him are thus:
• “Lacerated wound of 6x1x0.5 cm on the left
parietal region of scalp.
• Multiple contusions on the back, left shoulder,
left arm, varying in size from 5 to 20 cm in
length and 2 to 4 cm in breath.
• Abrasion of 3x0.5 cm on left leg.
• Swelling, tenderness and deformity on prox.
Phalanx of right middle finger.
• Abrasion of 2x0.2cm on the forehead.
13• Abrasion of 1 x0.2 cm on the left side of
forehead.
• Abrasion of 2x0.5 cm on the right ankle.
• Fracture of left parietal bone,
• Fracture in left shoulder.
• Fracture of proximal phalanx of middle ring
finger.
• Fracture of shaft of fibula at junction upper
1/3rd & middle 1/3rd.”
23. PW-14, IO admits that in the merg intimation report,
the names of Nand Lal, Bhagwat and Ramdular, i.e., accused
Nos. 8 to 10 respectively are not mentioned. He further
admits that in the spot panchnama also, their names are not
mentioned. He admits in his cross-examination that in Ex.
D-9, the incident with accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar is
mentioned to have happened at 08.30 PM on 3rd November
2006. He further admits that accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar
had grievous injuries on his head, ankle of left leg and the
middle finger of the right hand. He further admits that
Naresh Kumar was taken from Police Station to the doctor for
examination at 11.45 PM.
1424. It can thus be seen from the evidence of PW-14, IO that
the police had information about the incident at least prior to
11.45 PM on 3rd November 2006. No doubt that mere delay
in registering FIR would not be fatal to the prosecution case.
The effect of delay in lodging the FIR would differ in the facts
and circumstances of each case. In the present case,
admittedly, accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar had received
grievous injuries which have not been explained by the
prosecution. A specific defence has been taken by accused
No. 11 Naresh Kumar that when he was coming after
consuming liquor, he was assaulted by Atmaram (PW-1).
Thereafter, he went to the Police Station along with accused
No. 7 Charnu Jangde, accused No. 12 Paltan Jangde,
Ashwini and Vinod, whereafter he was referred for medical
treatment. Looking at the injuries of accused No. 11 Naresh
Kumar, it appears difficult that he could have taken part in
the second part of the incident. The prosecution has
suppressed the first report lodged by Atmaram (PW-1) as well
as by accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar. If Naresh Kumar was
examined at 11.45 PM, the police must have had some
information about the incident at least by 11.00 PM. As
15such, there is a delay of at least four hours in lodging the
FIR.
25. Believing the contents of the FIR that the incident has
taken place at around 08.30 PM and that the injured persons
had reached Baloda Bazar at around 10-11 PM where they
were informed that they could not be treated unless a report
was lodged, a further delay of around four to five hours in
lodging the FIR has not been explained. The distance
between Baloda Bazar and Suhela Police Station is
approximately 15 Kms. It has come on record that there is
an all-weather road connecting the two places. As such, at
the most, it would take around 30-40 minutes to reach
Suhela Police Station from Baloda Bazar. This delay of four
hours in lodging the FIR is not at all explained.
26. We will first consider the issue with regard to non-
explanation of injuries sustained by accused No. 11 Naresh
Kumar. In the case of Lakshmi Singh and Others v. State
of Bihar1, which case also arose out of a conviction under
Section 302 read with Section 149 of the IPC, this Court had
an occasion to consider the issue of non-explanation of
1 (1976) 4 SCC 394
16injuries sustained by the accused. This Court, after referring
to the earlier judgments on the issue, observed thus:
“12. …….It seems to us that in a murder case,
the non-explanation of the injuries sustained by
the accused at about the time of the occurrence
or in the course of altercation is a very important
circumstance from which the court can draw the
following inferences:
“(1) that the prosecution has
suppressed the genesis and the origin
of the occurrence and has thus not
presented the true version;
(2) that the witnesses who have denied
the presence of the injuries on the
person of the accused are lying on a
most material point and therefore their
evidence is unreliable;
(3) that in case there is a defence
version which explains the injuries on
the person of the accused it is rendered
probable so as to throw doubt on the
prosecution case.”
The omission on the part of the prosecution to
explain the injuries on the person of the accused
assumes much greater importance where the
evidence consists of interested or inimical
witnesses or where the defence gives a version
which competes in probability with that of the
prosecution one. In the instant case, when it is
held, as it must be, that the appellant Dasrath
Singh received serious injuries which have not
been explained by the prosecution, then it will be
difficult for the court to rely on the evidence of
PWs 1 to 4 and 6, more particularly, when some
of these witnesses have lied by stating that they
did not see any injuries on the person of the
accused. Thus neither the Sessions Judge nor the
High Court appears to have given due
17consideration to this important lacuna or
infirmity appearing in the prosecution case. We
must hasten to add that as held by this Court
in State of Gujarat v. Bai Fatima [(1975) 2 SCC 7 :
1975 SCC (Cri) 384] there may be cases where
the non-explanation of the injuries by the
prosecution may not affect the prosecution case.
This principle would obviously apply to cases
where the injuries sustained by the accused are
minor and superficial or where the evidence is so
clear and cogent, so independent and
disinterested, so probable, consistent and
creditworthy, that it far outweighs the effect of
the omission on the part of the prosecution to
explain the injuries. The present, however, is
certainly not such a case, and the High Court
was, therefore, in error in brushing aside this
serious infirmity in the prosecution case on
unconvincing premises.”
27. A similar view with regard to non-explanation of injuries
has been taken by this Court in the cases of State of
Rajasthan v. Madho and Another2, State of M.P. v.
Mishrilal (Dead) and Others3 and Nagarathinam and
Others v. State (Represented by Inspector of Police)4.
28. Undisputedly, in the present case, the injuries
sustained by accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar cannot be
considered to be minor or superficial. The witnesses are also
interested witnesses, inasmuch as they are close relatives of
2 1991 Supp (2) SCC 396
3 (2003) 9 SCC 426
4 (2006) 9 SCC 57
18the deceased. That there was previous enmity between the
two families, on account of election of Sarpanch, has come on
record. As observed by this Court in the case of Ramashish
Ray v. Jagdish Singh5, previous enmity is a double-edged
sword. On one hand, it can provide motive and on the other
hand, the possibility of false implication cannot be ruled out.
29. We have already seen herein above the injuries
sustained by accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar. Much prior to
lodging of the FIR at 03.15 AM on 4th November 2006 by
Khomlal, the Police had taken accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar
for medical examination. The memo forwarding accused No.
11 Naresh Kumar for medical examination to Medical Officer
mentions that accused No. 11 had informed the police that at
around 08.30 PM, he was assaulted by Atmaram (PW-1).
Undisputedly, the prosecution has suppressed information
with regard to the said incident. The prosecution has also
suppressed the FIR lodged by Atmaram (PW-1). It is thus
clear that the prosecution has attempted to suppress the real
genesis of the incident. Taking into consideration this aspect
of the matter, coupled with the non-explanation of the
5 (2005) 10 SCC 498
19injuries sustained by accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar, we are
of the considered view that accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar is
entitled to benefit of doubt.
30. That leaves us with the appeal of the other 3 accused,
namely accused No. 8 Nandlal, accused No. 9 Bhagwat and
accused No. 10 Ramdular. For considering their case we will
have to take into consideration the delay in lodging the FIR.
No doubt that in each and every case, delay in lodging the
FIR would not be fatal to the prosecution case. It will depend
upon facts and circumstances of each case. In the present
case, as already discussed hereinabove, assuming that the
incident had taken place at 08.30 PM and the injured
persons were at Baloda Bazar between 10-11 PM, and taking
into consideration that the distance between Baloda Bazar to
Suhela Police Station is 15 Kms., a delay of four hours in
lodging the FIR would cast a serious doubt on the
genuineness of the prosecution case. It becomes more
glaring since accused No. 11 Naresh Kumar had, in any case,
informed the police about the incident prior to 11.45 PM.
The suppression of the FIR lodged by him with respect to the
20attack on him by Atmaram (PW-1), so also the suppression of
the FIR lodged by Atmaram (PW-1) against accused No. 11
Naresh Kumar, adds to the doubt.
31. We may gainfully refer to the following observations of
this Court in the case of Ramesh Baburao Devaskar and
Others v. State of Maharashtra6:
“19. In a case of this nature, enmity between two
groups is accepted. In a situation of this nature,
whether the first information report was ante-
timed or not also requires serious consideration.
First information report, in a case of this nature,
provides for a valuable piece of evidence although
it may not be a substantial evidence. The reason
for insisting on lodging of first information report
without undue delay is to obtain the earlier
information in regard to the circumstances in
which the crime had been committed, the name
of the accused, the parts played by them, the
weapons which had been used as also the names
of eyewitnesses. Where the parties are at
loggerheads and there had been instances which
resulted in death of one or the other, lodging of a
first information report is always considered to be
vital.”
As held by this Court, the FIR is a valuable piece of
evidence, although it may not be substantial evidence. The
immediate lodging of an FIR removes suspicion with regard
to over implication of number of persons, particularly when
6 (2007) 13 SCC 501
21the case involved a fight between two groups. When the
parties are at loggerheads, the immediate lodging of the FIR
provides credence to the prosecution case.
32. Undisputedly, the present case rests on the evidence of
interested witnesses. No doubt that two of them are injured
witnesses. This Court, in the case of Vadivelu Thevar v.
The State of Madras7, has observed thus:
“11. ……Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and
well-established rule of law that the court is
concerned with the quality and not with the
quantity of the evidence necessary for proving or
disproving a fact. Generally speaking, oral
testimony in this context may be classified into
three categories, namely:
(1) Wholly reliable.
(2) Wholly unreliable.
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
12. In the first category of proof, the court should
have no difficulty in coming to its conclusion
either way — it may convict or may acquit on the
testimony of a single witness, if it is found to be
above reproach or suspicion of interestedness,
incompetence or subornation. In the second
category, the court equally has no difficulty in
coming to its conclusion. It is in the third
category of cases, that the court has to be
circumspect and has to look for corroboration in
material particulars by reliable testimony, direct
or circumstantial……”
7 [1957] SCR 981
2233. It could thus be seen that in the category of “wholly
reliable” witness, there is no difficulty for the prosecution to
press for conviction on the basis of the testimony of such a
witness. In case of “wholly unreliable” witness, again, there
is no difficulty, inasmuch as no conviction could be made on
the basis of oral testimony provided by a “wholly unreliable”
witness. The real difficulty comes in case of the third
category of evidence which is partly reliable and partly
unreliable. In such cases, the court is required to be
circumspect and separate the chaff from the grain, and seek
further corroboration from reliable testimony, direct or
circumstantial.
34. Undisputedly, in the present case, PWs 2 and 9 are
injured witnesses. As such, their presence cannot be
disputed. However, as already observed hereinabove, in case
of proven previous enmity, a possibility of false implication
cannot be ruled out. In the present case, it would be seen
that the entire family of accused No. 12 Paltan Jangde has
been roped in. Though PW-2 has identified and named the
accused in her cross-examination, she has stated that,
23though she recognized the relatives of the accused persons,
she does not remember their names. As such, the possibility
of implicating the entire family of Paltan cannot be ruled out.
35. As already discussed hereinabove, the names of Nand
Lal, Bhagwat and Ramdular are not mentioned in the merg
report, which was lodged prior to the lodging of FIR, so also
their names are not found in the inquest panchnama and
spot panchnama. Taking into consideration the delay in
lodging the FIR, with the circumstance of their names not
being mentioned in the contemporaneous documents, the
possibility of the said accused being falsely implicated cannot
be ruled out. In our view, the conviction of these accused
purely on the basis of oral testimony of the interested
witnesses, without sufficient corroboration, would not be
sustainable.
36. The prosecution has examined Baliram Sahu (PW-3),
Inder Sahu (PW-5), Jeewan Lal (PW-6) and Budheram (PW-8),
none of whom have supported the prosecution case.
According to PWs 2, 9 and 13, it was the witness Baliram
Sahu (PW-3) who had arranged for the tractor to take the
24injured persons to Baloda Bazar. However, he has stated that
though Mangtin Bai (PW-2) came to his place to inform him
about the incident, she had not informed him as to which of
the accused had assaulted the deceased and the injured
persons. In our view, therefore, the said appellants would
also be entitled to benefit of doubt.
37. We are, therefore, of the considered view that the
appellants Nand Lal, Bhagwat, Ramdular and Naresh Kumar
are entitled to benefit of doubt.
38. In the result, we pass the following order:
(i) The appeals are allowed;
(ii) The judgment and order dated 11th November 2014
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of
Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur, and the judgment and
order dated 24th May 2008 passed by the trial court
are quashed and set aside; and
(iii) The appellants are acquitted of the charges charged
with and are directed to be set at liberty forthwith, if
not required in any other case.
39. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
2540. Before we part with the judgment, we must place on
record our appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered
by Shri Vikas Upadhyay, learned counsel appearing on
behalf of accused Nos. 8 to 10 and Shri Sumeer Sodhi,
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-State.
A special mention needs to be made of the painstaking efforts
taken by Shri Renjith B. Marar, learned counsel, who was
appointed through the Supreme Court Legal Services
Authority as an amicus curiae for accused No. 11.
…..….......................J.
[B.R. GAVAI]
…….........................J.
[VIKRAM NATH]
…….........................J.
[SANJAY KAROL]
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 14, 2023.
26