REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 990
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1381-1382 OF 2017
MADAN …APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH …RESPONDENT(S)
WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1790 OF 2017
J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1. These appeals challenge the judgment and order
dated 22nd February 2017, passed by the Division Bench of the
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Capital Case Nos.
3359 and 3520 of 2015 with Reference No. 9 of 2015 and
Criminal Appeal No. 3519 of 2015, thereby dismissing the
appeals filed by appellant Madan and another accused Ishwar;
whereas, it allowed in part, the appeal filed by appellant
Sudesh Pal. By the said judgment, the High Court confirmed
the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 31st
1July 2015 passed by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge,
Court No. 3, Muzzaffarnagar (hereinafter referred to as “trial
court”) in Sessions Case No. 09/2005 with Sessions Case No.
838 of 2005 and 10/2005, in respect of appellant – Madan,
while commuting the sentence of capital punishment to life
imprisonment in respect of appellant – Sudesh Pal.
2. Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present
appeals are as under:
2.1 The First Information Report (“FIR” for short) was
lodged on a written report given by informant Lokendra (PW-
1), on 14th October 2003 at P.S. Babri, District Muzzafarnagar,
which was registered as Crime No. 197 of 2003, for offences
punishable under Sections 147, 148, 149, 302, 307, 323 and
452 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as
“IPC”). The incident took place at 5.30 PM and the FIR came
to be registered on the same day at 7.40 PM.
2.2 The report was recorded by one, Naresh Pal s/o Vijay
Pal r/o village Barwala, District Baghpat on the oral report of
Lokendra (PW-1). According to the FIR, Smt. Vimla Devi, who
was the mother of Ram Kishan, cousin of Lokendra (PW-1),
was a candidate in the election for Gram Pradhan; whereas the
2wife of one Arshad was the opposing candidate. On the one
hand, Lokendra (PW-1) supported the candidature of Vimla
Devi; whereas, the family of appellant Madan and Ram Bhajan
supported the candidature of the wife of Arshad. When Vimla
Devi came to be elected as Gram Pradhan along with Lokendra
(PW-1), who also came to be elected as a member of the Gram
Panchayat, appellant Madan and his family members bore a
grudge with Lokendra (PW-1) and others on account of the
feeling of jealousy.
2.3 The FIR states that on 14th October 2003, at about
5.30 PM, when Satendra, the real brother of Lokendra (PW-1),
his nephew Sunil s/o Chandrapal, cousin Ram Kishan s/o
Narain Singh @ Lala, Sukhpal Singh (PW-2) s/o Lotan Singh
and his father Jai Singh (PW-8) s/o Ganga Ram were going to
the house of Up-Pradhan Rizwan s/o Irshad Khan (PW-7) for
discussing problems of the village, and had reached the house
of Rashid s/o Mustafa, appellant Madan along with Rajveer,
Ram Bhajan, Ramveer, and Kanwar Pal who were the sons of
Ishwar along with Ishwar himself, who was the brother-in-law
(sala) of appellant Madan, also known as Pahalwan, appellant
Sudesh Pal, who was the real brother-in-law (sadu) of
3appellant Madan along with Neetu, who was the nephew of
appellant Madan, armed with licensed guns, rifles and
country-made pistols came from behind and started firing
indiscriminately. As a result of the said firing, Satendra and
Sunil fell down on ‘Khadanja’. When Masooq Ali s/o Abdul
Gaffur came out of his house upon hearing the sound of
gunfire, the accused persons shot fire at him due to which he
also fell down. Following which, Ram Kishan and Sukhpal
Singh (PW-2) ran away to save their lives. Ram Kishan
thereafter entered into the house of the Up-Pradhan Rizwan.
2.4 It is further stated in the FIR that the accused persons
thereafter entered the house of Up-Pradhan Rizwan and fired
shots at Ram Kishan, Rizwan and Rihan. They also fired shots
at Sukhpal Singh (PW-2). Ram Kishan, Sunil and Satendra
died on the spot. When Mumtaz Khan (PW-5) s/o Imtyaz
reached at the place of incident, the accused persons fired
shots at him as well. The accused persons further assaulted
Jai Singh (PW-8), father of Lokendra (PW-1) with the ‘butt’ of
the gun who then ran away to save his life. Following which,
when the villagers were taking Rizwan, Rihan, Masooq Ali,
Sukhpal Singh (PW-2) and Mumtaz Khan (PW-5) to the
4hospital; Rizwan, Rihan and Masooq Ali succumbed to their
injuries and died on the way and their bodies were accordingly
kept in their houses. When the accused persons were firing at
the place of the incident, Ram Pal s/o Salet, Sudhir (PW-11)
s/o Mahendra, Anil (PW-3) s/o Chandrapal, Mahesh Pal (PW-
4) s/o Prahlad, Harpal Singh (PW-10) s/o Dhara, Mahipal s/o
Atal Singh along with other villagers reached and saw the said
incident. Lokendra (PW-1) also reached the place of the
incident and witnessed the incident with his own eyes and
requested to register the report and take legal action.
2.5 The FIR was registered and the investigation was
subsequently taken over on 14th October 2003 by Mr.
Raghunandan Singh Bhadauria (PW-24), who was the then
Station House Officer (for short ‘SHO’). He recorded the
statement of Lokendra (PW-1) and proceeded to the place of
the incident in front of the house of Rashid s/o Mustafa where
he found the dead bodies of Satendra, Jai Singh (PW-8) and
Sunil in a pool of blood. The dead body of Masooq Ali s/o Abdul
Gafoor was on the cot in his house. When he reached the
house of Rizwan, where he found the dead bodies of Rizwan
and Rihan s/o Irshad Khan (PW-7) lying on the cot, whereas
5the body of Ram Kishan s/o Narain Singh was found lying in
a pool of blood in the veranda of the said house. Upon
inspection of the place of the incident, Raghunandan Singh
Bhadauria (PW-24) found empty cartridges near the dead body
which were taken into possession. Three empty cartridges of
12 bore 9 mm were found and taken into possession in the
presence of witnesses Anil Kumar (PW-3) s/o Chandrapal Jat
and Sri Dheer Singh s/o Prahlad Singh. The recovery memo
(Ext. Ka – 2) was accordingly prepared and signed. He then
took plain and blood-stained mud from the spot in the
presence of the said witnesses. The recovery memo for the
same was prepared and kept sealed in two separate containers
(Ext. Ka-3). He also collected plain and blood-stained mud
from where the bodies of Rizwan, Rihan and Ram Kishan were
lying and a recovery memo (Ext. Ka – 6) was prepared to that
effect. Further, empty cartridges of 12 bore 9 mm, 5 bullets
along with another such bullet were recovered and taken into
custody which were then sealed in the presence of the
witnesses. However, Raghunandan Singh Bhadauria (PW-24)
could not recover the blood-stained mud from the place where
Masooq Ali, Rizwan and Rihan fell down and were
6subsequently taken to the hospital due to the movement of
persons at the place of occurrence.
2.6 The Investigating Officer then recorded the statement
of other witnesses after which he inspected the place of the
incident and prepared the site plan. After panchayatnama of
the dead bodies, the same were sent for post-mortem
examination through Head Constable Surendra Singh, Head
Constable Ram Kumar, Constable Yashpal and Constable
Satya Prakash. After Raghunandan Singh Bhadauria (PW-24)
was transferred, the investigation was taken over by Surajpal
Singh (PW-23), SHO on 18th October 2003. He took steps to
execute non-bailable warrants issued against the accused
persons and also took steps to initiate proceedings under
Sections 82-83 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(hereinafter referred to as “Cr.P.C.”). After the copies of the
post-mortem report were obtained, the same were noted and
enclosed with the C.D. of the deceased Ram Kishan, Masooq
Ali, Rizwan, Rihan, Satendra and Sunil. Statements of
witnesses Sudhir (PW-11), Harpal Singh (PW-10), Mahesh Pal
(PW-4), and Mahipal were recorded at village Butrada.
Surajpal Singh (PW-23) also recorded the statements of Rashid
7Sachdev and Ram Mehar, who were the witnesses of the
panchayatnama. During investigation, Surajpal Singh (PW-23)
received information that one co-accused, who was involved
along with the accused persons named in the FIR had died in
the same incident and his body was taken away by the accused
persons and the same was found and recovered from the jungle
(agricultural field) of village Pinana regarding which, Case
Crime No. 799 of 2003 was registered at P.S. Kotwali, for
offences punishable under Sections 302 and 201 of IPC.
Surajpal Singh (PW-23) thereafter recorded the statements of
other witnesses and also raided the house of the accused
persons.
2.7 Thereafter, investigation was transferred and taken
over on 21st December 2003 by Inspector Adesh Kumar
Sharma (PW-20), EOW, Meerut. Accused persons Ishwar and
Kunwar Pal were taken in police remand. He then proceeded
to the place of the incident along with police personnel for the
recovery of weapon; whereupon, a country-made pistol and the
gun used in the incident were recovered at the instance of
accused persons Ishwar and Kanwar Pal. Further, one empty
cartridge was found in the gun whereas one empty cartridge
8of 9 mm was found in the country-made pistol. Both the fire-
arms were in operating condition and the Recovery Memo for
the gun and the country-made pistol were prepared and sealed
in two separate clothes. Following which, panchayatnama was
prepared by Sub-Inspector Surendra Singh (PW-16) with
regards to the three deceased, namely, Masooq Ali, Rihan and
Rizwan. Additionally, panchayatnama and inquest reports
with regards to the deceased, namely, Ram Kishan, Satendra
and Sunil were prepared by another Sub-Inspector.
2.8 Subsequently, the investigation was transferred and
handed over to Bahadur Singh Chauhan, the then C.B.C.I.D.
(PW-17) on 13th January 2004 by the orders of higher
authority. Bahadur Singh Chauhan (PW-17) recorded the
statement of Lokendra (PW-1), inspected the place of the
incident and accordingly prepared a site plan. The statements
of other witnesses were also recorded. Bahadur Singh
Chauhan (PW-17) thereafter recorded the statements of earlier
investigating officers in C.D.
2.9 Subsequently, the investigation was again transferred
from C.B.C.I.D. to the civil police. After the chargesheet was
submitted by Bahadur Singh Chauhan (PW-17) against
9appellant Madan along with other accused persons, namely,
Kanwar Pal and Ishwar; the investigation was taken over by
the then S.H.O. P.S. Babri, Siddh Narayan Yadav on 18th
October 2004 who was examined as PW-19. Siddh Narayan
Yadav (PW-19) submitted the chargesheet against appellant
Sudesh Pal and another accused person who was absconding
at the time. Siddh Narayan Yadav (PW-19) was the fifth IO of
this case and he also submitted a chargesheet against accused
Rajvir along with other accused persons.
2.10 The post-mortem of deceased Ram Kishan was
conducted by Dr. Arvind Kumar Aggarwal (PW-14) on 15th
October 2013 at 12.50 PM. The injuries sustained by
deceased Ram Kishan are thus:
1. Wound of firearm 4 cm X 1.5 cm in depth of the
muscle in the right side off ace and aside of the
nose. Around the wound there were tattooing
in the area of 20 cm x 7 cm.
2. Wound of entering of 8 firearms 20 cm X 19 cm
towards left side of chest which was in deep
ranging from ½ cm X ½ cm from the surface of
the chest. Around the wound no blacking and
10tattooing were present. One metal pellet was
taken out from the cavity of the chest.
3. Wound of entering of firearm ½ cm X ½ cm X
till the cavity of abdomen, towards left of
abdomen and 1 cm above of tunica crest.
4. Wound of entering of firearms towards right
side of the chest, 5 m away from the right side
nipple. As per position of 2 hrs. 1.5 cm X 1 cm
in deep in the cavity of the chest.
5. Wound of entering of firearm ½ cm X ½ cm in
deep of cavity of the abdomen, around 5 cm
away from the right side navel, in the position
of 8 hrs.
6. Mark of bruises towards the opposite of chest in
the area of 1.4 cm X 7 cm in right side of the
chest.
7. Wound of exit of firearm in the area of 33 cm X
21 cm, towards back side of the chest and was
in deep from 2 cm X 1.5 cm to 1cm X 1 cm in
the cavity of the chest.
118. Wound of entering of firearm 1.5 cm X 1 cm in
depth of the muscle, beneath knee on right
forearm.
9. Wound of exit of firearm 3.5 cm to 3 cm in depth
of the muscle in the mid of right side arm in the
correspondence of injury No. 8 which is wound
of entering of firearm.
10. Wound of entering of firearm in depth of muscle
from 1 cm X ½ cm, in the inner portion of left
upper side arm but 5 cm beneath from armpit.
Around the wound the tattooing was present.
11. Wound of exit of firearm in depth of the muscle
1 cm X 1.5 cm, corresponding the injury No. 10.
12. Brusted wound in the area of 1.5 cm X 6 cm to
2.5 cm X 1 cm deep in the muscle.
2.11 The post-mortem of deceased Masooq Ali was
conducted by Dr. Arvind Kumar Aggarwal (PW-14) on 15th
October 2013 at 1.30 PM. The injuries sustained by deceased
Masooq Ali are thus:
121. Wound of entering of firearm measuring ½ cm X
½ cm deep in the cavity of the chest and 8 cm away
from left side nipple in the position of 11.00 hrs.
2. Wound of exit of firearm measuring 2 cm X 1.5 cm
in deep in the cavity of chest, towards right side of
chest beneath 11 cm of armpit and 14 cm away
from the nipple in the position of 9 hrs.
2.12 The post-mortem of deceased Rizwan was conducted
by Dr. Arvind Kumar Aggarwal (PW-14) on 15th October 2013
at 1.45 PM. The injuries sustained by deceased Rizwan are
thus:
1. Wound of entering of firearm in deep of cavity of
chest measuring ½ cm X ½ cm towards left side of
chest, 2 cm beneath the outer portion of clavicle.
2. Wound of entering of firearm in deep of cavity of
chest measuring 1 cm X 1 cm in front of the left
side of chest 4 cm away from left nipple in the
position of 7.00 hrs.
3. Wound of exit of firearm 2 cm X 1.5 cm in deep of
the cavity of the chest towards back side of the
chest 3 cm away from the middle line in right side
13and 7 cm beneath the neck corresponding the
injury No. 2.
2.13 The post-mortem of deceased Rihan was conducted
by Dr. Arvind Kumar Aggarwal (PW-14) on 15th October 2013
at 2.10 PM. The injuries sustained by deceased Rihan are
thus:
1. Wound of entering of firearm 1.2 cm X 1.2 cm in
deep of the bone, on upper side of the left
shoulder. Around the wound tattooing was
present. The bone beneath the injury was
fractured.
2. Wound of exit of firearm 1 cm X 1 cm in deep of
the cavity of the chest towards right side of the
chest, 12 cm beneath of imprear angle of Scapula
and 15 cm away from the middle line.
2.14 The post-mortem of deceased Satendra was
conducted by Dr. Arvind Kumar Aggarwal (PW-14) on 15th
October 2013 at 2.30 PM. The injuries sustained by deceased
Satendra are thus:
1. Wound of entering of firearm ½ cm X ½ cm in deep
of the bone towards the back side of the right
14shoulder and 7 cm beneath the upper portion. The
bone beneath the injury was fractured.
2. Wound of exit of firearm 1.5 cm X 1 cm
corresponding the injury No. 1 and on outer
portion of right side collarbone.
3. Wound of exit of firearm ½ cm X ½ cm in deep of
cavity of chest, towards left side of chest and 7 cm
beneath the left nipple in the position of 7.00 hrs.
4. Wound of exit of firearm 2 cm X 1 cm in deep of
cavity of the chest towards back side of left side
chest, 16 cm beneath the scapula corresponding
the injury.
2.15 The post-mortem of deceased Sunil was conducted by
Dr. Arvind Kumar Aggarwal (PW-14) on 15th October 2013 at
3.00 PM. The injuries sustained by deceased Sunil are thus:
1. Wound of entering of firearm 4 cm x 3 cm in the
deep of the cavity of the chest towards left side of
the chest and 11 cm away from nipple in the
position of 11.00 hrs.
2. Second and third rib beneath the injury were
fractured.
153. The small four metal pellet and a bending piece of
plastic in cylindrical shape was taken out from the
cavity of the chest.
2.16 After completing the investigation, chargesheet came
to be submitted against the arrested accused persons along
with absconding ones in the court of jurisdictional Magistrate.
Since the case was exclusively triable by the Sessions Court,
the same came to be committed to the Sessions Judge,
Muzaffarnagar. Following which, charges were framed against
appellants Madan and Sudesh Pal and other accused persons,
namely, Kunwar Pal and Ishwar for offences punishable under
Sections 148 and 449, Section 302 read with Section 149,
Section 307 read with Section 149, Section 323 read with
Section 149 of IPC by the trial court; whereas, an additional
charge for offence punishable under Section 25 of the Arms
Act, 1959 was framed against accused Ishwar.
2.17 Subsequently, accused Kunwar Pal absconded and
the trial commenced against appellant Madan and co-accused
Ishwar in Sessions Trial No. 09 of 2005, against appellant
Sudesh Pal in Sessions Trial No. 838 of 2005 and against
accused Ishwar in Sessions Trial No. 10 of 2005 for the charge
16under Section 25 of the Arms Act, 1959 arising out of Case
Crime No. 204 of 2003. The accused persons denied the
charges and pleaded to be tried.
2.18 The prosecution examined as many as 25 witnesses
to prove the guilt of the accused persons. In the present case,
three out of the six deceased persons, namely, Ram Kishan,
Satendra and Sunil were related with Lokendra (PW-1) as his
cousin, real brother, and nephew respectively. They were also
related with Jai Singh (PW-8) and Anil (PW-3). The statements
of the accused persons were recorded under Section 313 of
Cr.P.C. wherein they denied the allegations against them and
stated that they were not involved in the incident and were
thus innocent. However, due to village election rivalry, they
were being falsely implicated in this case but did not examine
any witness in defence.
2.19 At the conclusion of trial, the trial court vide judgment
dated 31st July 2015 held the accused persons guilty of
committing the murder of six persons and accordingly
convicted the appellants herein along with accused Ishwar for
offences punishable under Sections 148 and 449, Section 302
read with Section 149, Section 307 read with Section 149,
17Section 323 read with Section 149 of IPC, while accused
Ishwar was also additionally convicted for the offence
punishable under Section 25 of the Arms Act, 1959. The trial
court, observing the offences committed by the appellants
herein to have been falling in the ambit of the rarest of the rare
case, imposed sentence of capital punishment to the
appellants herein for the offence punishable under Section
302 read with Section 149 of IPC, while it sentenced accused
Ishwar to imprisonment for life for the same. The trial court
sentenced each of the three accused persons 3 years rigorous
imprisonment under Section 148 of IPC; life imprisonment
under Section 449 and Section 307 read with Section 149 of
IPC and one year rigorous imprisonment under Section 323
read with Section 149 of IPC. The trial court further sentenced
accused Ishwar to five years rigorous imprisonment under
Section 25 of the Arms Act.
2.20 Being aggrieved thereby, the accused persons
preferred their respective appeals before the High Court with
regards to the conviction and sentence awarded by the trial
court. The High Court, by the impugned judgment, while
commuting the sentence of appellant Sudesh Pal from capital
18punishment to imprisonment for life, dismissed the appeals
filed by appellant Madan and accused Ishwar and confirmed
their conviction and sentence awarded by the trial court. The
High Court further confirmed the Death Reference insofar as
appellant Madan is concerned; whereas insofar as appellant
Sudesh Pal is concerned, his appeal was partly allowed and
the sentence of capital punishment imposed on him was
converted to life imprisonment.
2.21 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeals.
3. We have heard Shri Anand Grover, learned Senior
Counsel appearing for appellant Madan in Criminal Appeal
Nos. 1381-82 of 2017, Shri Manish Kumar Vikkey, learned
counsel appearing for appellant Sudesh Pal in Criminal Appeal
No. 1790 of 2017 and Shri Brijender Chahar, learned Senior
Counsel appearing for respondent-State of Uttar Pradesh.
4. Shri Grover, learned Senior Counsel appearing for
appellant Madan firstly, addressed us on merits of the matter.
He submitted that the order of conviction as passed by the trial
court and confirmed by the High Court is not at all
sustainable. He submitted that initially 11 witnesses were
cited as eye witnesses. However, 7 of them have turned
19hostile. The prosecution case is therefore left with only 4
alleged eye witnesses i.e. Lokendra (PW-1), Irshad Khan (PW-
7), Harpal Singh (PW-10) and Sudhir (PW-11).
5. Shri Grover submitted that, from the testimony of
Lokendra (PW-1) itself, it can be seen that his presence at the
scene of crime is doubtful. It is submitted that the evidence of
this witness is contradictory to his original statement recorded
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. There are substantial
improvements in his evidence. Though in his statement
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., he stated that he was with
a group of people, but in cross-examination he admitted that
he was not walking along with the group, but was behind them
by around 10 yards from the cross roads (towards the north)
when the group of people reached Rashid’s house. He
submitted that Lokendra (PW-1) admitted that he could not
clearly see the place of incident or the group of people from
where he was standing. He further submitted that the said
witness has admitted that on hearing the sound of firing, he
ran further northwards from the cross-roads from Rashid’s
house and could not see the site.
206. Shri Grover submitted that there are also substantial
contradictions in the testimony of Lokendra (PW-1) which
casts doubt with regard to his presence at Rizwan’s house. He
submitted that, in the chief-examination, this witness has
stated that on witnessing the shooting at Rashid’s house, he
ran towards Rizwan and Rihan’s house and took cover there
and witnessed the incident at Rizwan’s house. However, in
cross-examination, he contrarily stated that on hearing the
sounds of firing, he ran further northwards from the cross-
roads and stayed there for 15-20 minutes. From the evidence
of Jai Singh (PW-8) and Sukhpal Singh (PW-2), father and
uncle of Lokendra (PW-1) respectively, it is clear that Lokendra
(PW-1) was not present at the place of incident. Even in the
case registered by Lokendra (PW-1), he does not show himself
to be an eye witness. It is submitted that there are
contradictions in his testimony about the authorship of Tehrir.
7. Shri Grover submitted that if Lokendra (PW-1) had
really accompanied the group, then certainly he would also
have received some injuries. The learned Senior Counsel,
relying on the judgments of this Court in the cases of Jaikam
21Khan v. State of Uttar Pradesh1 and Khema @ Khem
Chandra v. State of Uttar Pradesh2, submitted that the
testimony of this witness, being totally contradictory, cannot
be relied upon for convicting the appellant Madan.
8. Shri Grover further submitted that Irshad Khan (PW-
7) is the father of deceased Rizwan and Rihan, who were
allegedly shot at their own house. He submitted that there are
material contradictions in the evidence of Irshad Khan (PW-7)
also. It is submitted that, in his statement recorded under
Section 161 Cr.P.C., Irshad Khan (PW-7) stated that he was
present on the roof of the adjoining house and not inside the
room in his house and hence, could not have witnessed the
incident at his house. It is submitted that these contradictions
have been put to him in cross-examination. It is submitted
that non-examination of Mehmoona Begum, mother of
deceased Rizwan and Rihan, who was present at the place of
incident, also casts doubt about the presence of Irshad Khan
(PW-7) at the place of incident. He submitted that if Irshad
Khan (PW-7) was really present at the place of incident, then
1 (2021) 13 SCC 716
2 2022 SCC OnLine SC 991
22there was no reason as to why he did not receive any injury.
The learned Senior Counsel submitted that the presence of
this witness is not supported from his deposition given in
Tehrir. It is submitted that the conduct of Irshad Khan (PW-
7) in not informing the police about the incident also casts
doubt about his presence.
9. Shri Grover submitted that the presence of Harpal
Singh (PW-10) at the place of incident is also doubtful. In his
deposition, Harpal Singh (PW-10) has stated that he was at the
village main road, 4-5 steps ahead of the victims at Rashid’s
house. On hearing the sound of firing, he allegedly hid near
Amanullah’s house at the time of incident. However, in his
statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., he has stated
that at the time of incident, he was near the private school
rickshaw stand which was about 600 metres away from the
place of incident. The learned Senior Counsel submitted that
a perusal of the spot map would show that the private school
is not near the place of incident. The learned Senior Counsel
submitted that further the evidence of this witness is not
corroborated by the injured witness or other eye witnesses
including Sudhir (PW-11). It is further submitted that there
23are material contradictions with regard to time of incident in
the deposition of the said witness and as such, the testimony
of this witness is not credible.
10. Insofar as Lokendra (PW-1) is concerned, Shri Grover
submitted that the testimony of the said witness suffers from
material omissions with regard to involvement of appellant
Madan in the incident. In his statement recorded under
Section 161 Cr.P.C., Lokendra (PW-1) had stated that there
were 2-3 unknown people involved in the crime. Further in
his testimony, there were material omissions in this regard. In
his testimony, Lokendra (PW-1) vaguely mentioned that the
appellant Madan and his family members were involved in the
crime. However, he has not given any details with regard to
the same.
11. Shri Grover further submitted that there is
improvement in the evidence of Sudhir (PW-11) with regard to
the cause of his presence at the place of incident. In his
statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., Sudhir (PW-
11) did not give any reason for his presence at the place of
incident. It was for the first time in court that he deposed
about being in the locality in search of labourers to work in his
24field. He submitted that there are serious lapses in the
prosecution case inasmuch as though Sudhir (PW-11) is
alleged to have accompanied Lokendra (PW-1) to Police Station
Babri to register the Tehrir, he did not permit Sudhir (PW-11)
to go inside the police station while registering the Tehrir. He
submitted that such a conduct is not consistent with human
nature. The learned Senior counsel therefore submitted that
Sudhir (PW-11) would fall in the category of a chance witness
and the testimony of such a witness cannot be relied upon
without there being corroboration from any independent
testimony. The learned Senior Counsel relies on the
judgments of this Court in the cases of Acharaparambath
Pradeepan and Another v. State of Kerala3 and Harjinder
Singh alias Bhola v. State of Punjab4.
12. Shri Grover further submitted that there are material
contradictions regarding the place where deceased Masooq Ali
was shot. According to Lokendra (PW-1) and Harpal Singh
(PW-10), Masooq Ali was shot and killed in front of his own
3 (2006) 13 SCC 643
4 (2004) 11 SCC 253
25house. However, this version is not supported by the
testimony of Irshad Khan (PW-7).
13. Shri Grover submitted that all the aforesaid witnesses
are related to the deceased and they or their relatives held
posts in the village panchayat. He submitted that Lokendra
(PW-1) is the brother of deceased Satendra, son of injured Jai
Singh (PW-8) and cousin of deceased Ram Kishan. Sudhir
(PW-11) is an immediate cousin of Ram Kishan and related to
Lokendra (PW-1). Irshad Khan (PW-7) is the father of deceased
Rizwan and Rihan. It is submitted that these witnesses also
supported Vimla Devi, the then sarpanch and Ram Kishan’s
mother. Lokendra (PW-1) and Sudhir (PW-11) are related
witnesses of deceased Ram Kishan and Satendra. It is
submitted that all these witnesses have falsely implicated
appellant Madan so as to ensure the conviction of appellant
Madan and his family members.
14. Shri Grover submitted that the injured eye witnesses
Sukhpal Singh (PW-2), Mumtaz Khan (PW-5) and Jai Singh
(PW-8) have not supported the prosecution story alleging the
involvement of the present accused. It is submitted that
though Mumtaz Khan (PW-5) has stated in his statement
26recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. that the appellant Madan
along with other accused was involved in the shooting, in his
examination-in-chief, he has stated that when he came out on
hearing the sound of firing, he saw 3-4 persons who had
covered their faces with masks and these persons were
involved in shooting. Mumtaz Khan (PW-5) does not
specifically name the appellant Madan. He submitted that
even there are contradictions in the evidence of Sukhpal Singh
(PW-2). It is submitted that even Jai Singh (PW-8), father of
Lokendra (PW-1) has not supported the prosecution case and
was declared hostile. It is therefore submitted that in the
absence of the independent witnesses supporting the
prosecution case, the conviction could not have been based on
the basis of testimony of interested witnesses. He further
submitted that the deposition of Bahadur Singh Chauhan
(PW-17) would show that 2-3 unknown persons from outside
the village were also involved in the crime. However, the police
has failed to investigate the matter with regard to involvement
of persons from other villages. It is submitted that only on
account of political rivalry, appellant Madan has been
implicated in the present crime. The learned Senior counsel
27further submitted that the recoveries of the weapons alleged
to have been used in the crime are farcical and in any case not
supported by the Ballistic Report.
15. Shri Grover submitted that there are serious lacunae
in the investigation. It is submitted that as per the evidence
of Lokendra (PW-1), Irshad Khan (PW-7) and Harpal Singh
(PW-10), the police were present at the scene prior to the report
being lodged at the police station i.e. before 07.40 P.M.
However, Raghunandan Singh Bhadauria (PW-24) stated that
he arrived at the location at around 08.30 P.M. i.e. after the
report was lodged at 07.40 P.M. It is submitted that there is
no certainty as to when the Special Report under Section 174
Cr.P.C. was sent to the Magistrate. He submitted that the
timing of investigation becomes particularly important in view
of the opinion of Dr. Arvind Kumar Aggarwal (PW-14) who
conducted the post-mortem stating that the death of the
deceased could have been between 8-9 P.M. i.e. after the
investigation had started. He submitted that the lapses in the
investigation are further apparent from the fact that there are
inconsistencies with regard to the presence of bodies of the
deceased and the place of inquest. It is submitted that from
28the evidence of some of the witnesses, it appears that the
bodies were moved from the site of shooting prior to the
starting of inquest. However, the inquest report records the
presence of bodies at the site of shooting i.e., at the village
main road, Masooq Ali’s house and Deputy Pradhan’s house.
It is submitted that all these factors will cumulatively raise
substantial doubt on the fairness of investigation and
reporting.
16. Shri Grover submitted that, though independent
witnesses were available, for the reasons best known to the
prosecution, they have not been examined. It is submitted
that uptill now, Mehmoona Begum, wife of Irshad Khan (PW-
7), who was present inside the kitchen during the killing of
Rizwan, Rihan and Ram Kishan, was not presented as a
witness. It is submitted that if this witness could have been
examined, the real genesis of the incident would come forth.
It is further submitted that since the occurrence has taken
place on the main street, many independent witnesses must
have witnessed the incident. They have also not been
examined. Even Rashid, in front of whose house, one of the
shootings occurred, was not produced as a witness. It is
29further submitted that Amanullah, in whose house Harpal
Singh (PW-10) allegedly hid during the shooting, was not
examined as a witness.
17. Shri Grover therefore submitted that the prosecution
has failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt and as
such, the judgment and order of conviction as recorded by the
trial court and confirmed by the High Court is liable to be set
aside.
18. Shri Grover, in the alternative, submitted that even if
this Court does not interfere with the conviction, the capital
punishment awarded to appellant Madan is not sustainable.
He submitted that the trial court and the High Court have
failed to draw a balance-sheet of mitigating and aggravating
circumstances. It is submitted that the prosecution has to
discharge the burden to place the material on record to
establish that there is no possibility of reforming a convict
before capital sentence could be awarded. Shri Grover
submitted that in the present case, the State was directed to
produce three Reports i.e. Probation Officers Report, Prison
Conduct Report and Psychological Assessment Report. He
submitted that, from the conduct of appellant Madan in jail, it
30is evident that appellant Madan has shown positive signs of
reformation and poses no continuing threat to society.
Appellant Madan is currently 64 years old and he has been in
prison for 18 years and 3 months. It is submitted that during
the entire duration, he has had no history of any kind of
offence in prison.
19. Shri Grover submitted that even from the
Psychological Evaluation Report conducted by Institute of
Human Behaviour & Allied Sciences (IHBAS), Dilshad Garden,
Delhi, it could be seen that the said Report shows that the
socio-occupational functioning is unaffected. It further shows
that appellant Madan has voluntarily taken up tasks in prison
to keep himself occupied and also taken up responsibilities to
help younger prisoners to lead a better life in prison. It is
submitted that, taking into consideration all these factors, the
capital punishment needs to be commuted to life
imprisonment.
20. Shri Grover submitted that even the alleged motive is
far-fetched. He submitted that the political rivalry which is
attributed as motive is remote inasmuch as the elections were
held for the period prior to more than two and half years of the
31incident. The learned Senior Counsel therefore requested for
allowing the appeals.
21. Shri Grover further submitted that the present case
does not fall in the category of rarest of rare cases to warrant
capital punishment. He submitted that the finding recorded
by the trial court and the High Court with regard to the present
case being rarest of rare cases is without basis and as such,
even if the conviction is confirmed, capital punishment would
not be sustainable.
22. Shri Grover fairly submitted that though there are
certain criminal antecedents against the appellant, the same
cannot be a ground to deny his commutation. The learned
Senior Counsel submitted that in the event this Court does not
interfere with the order of conviction, the capital punishment
deserves to be commuted to life imprisonment.
23. Shri Manish Kumar Vikkey, learned counsel
appearing for appellant Sudesh Pal has adopted the
arguments as advanced by Shri Grover.
24. Shri Chahar, learned Senior Counsel appearing on
behalf of the State submitted that no interference would be
32warranted with the concurrent orders of trial court and the
High Court.
25. Shri Chahar submitted that the appellants have
brutally killed six innocent persons only on account of political
rivalry. It is submitted that the appellants who have
committed such a heinous and gruesome crime, are not
entitled to any leniency. It is submitted that appellant Madan
was already a hardened criminal. He submitted that he was
also awarded life imprisonment in another case and under his
leadership, the accused persons killed six persons. It is
submitted that the incident was such which caused terror in
the society and the High Court and the trial court have rightly
held the present case to be the rarest of rare cases so as to
award death penalty to the accused. He therefore submitted
that no interference would be warranted in the present case.
26. With the assistance of the learned counsel for both
the parties, we have examined the entire evidence and perused
the material placed on record.
27. The incident has taken place in two parts as under:
(i) The first place is near the house of Rashid son of
Mustafa. Appellant Madan along with Rajveer, Ram
33Bhajan, Ramveer, Kanwar Pal and Ishwar armed with
licensed guns, rifles and country-made pistols came
from behind and started firing indiscriminately. As a
result of which, Satendra and Sunil fell down on the
Khadanja and died on the spot. When Masooq Ali,
after hearing the sound of gunfire, came out of his
house, the accused persons also fired shots at him. As
a result of which, he also fell down.
(ii) The second place is the house of Up-Pradhan Rizwan.
After indiscriminate firing by the accused persons,
Ram Kishan and Sukhpal Singh (PW-2) ran away to
save their lives and Ram Kishan entered the house of
Rizwan. The accused persons followed them and
entered into the house of Rizwan and fired shots at
Ram Kishan, Rizwan and Rihan. As a result of which,
Ram Kishan died on the spot. Masooq Ali, Rizwan and
Rihan were taken to the hospital by the villagers.
However, on the way to hospital, they succumbed to
their injuries.
28. Though the prosecution has examined 11 witnesses,
only 4 of them supported the prosecution case. PW-1 is
34Lokendra. He has deposed in his evidence that, on 14th
October 2003 at around 05.30 in the evening, he and his
brother Satendra, Sukhpal Singh (PW-2), Ram Kishan, his
father Jai Singh (PW-8) and Sunil were going to the Deputy
Pradhan Rizwan’s house for discussing the problems of the
village. He has stated that when they reached near the house
of Rashid son of Mustafa, the accused persons including the
present appellants carrying rifles, guns etc. in their hands,
came behind them. They shouted that they would kill these
people today. After saying this, all the people started firing
indiscriminately with their weapons. Due to those injuries,
Satendra and Sunil fell down on the spot. He stated that Ram
Kishan and Sukhpal Singh (PW-2) were also shot but they fled
away to save their lives. He further stated that in the
meantime, Masooq Ali came out of his house near the spot.
The accused persons also shot him and he also fell down.
29. Lokendra (PW-1) further stated that Ram Kishan
entered into Rizwan’s house to save his life and the accused
persons also entered Rizwan’s house after him. When Rizwan
and Rihan were trying to stop them from entering their house,
they also fired shots at both of them. The said witness cannot
35be said to be an eye witness as to what has happened inside
the house of Rizwan. However, insofar as the first incident is
concerned, he is an eye witness to the same.
30. In his examination-in-chief, Lokendra (PW-1) has
stated about Vimla Devi, mother of deceased Ram Kishan
contesting the election of village Pradhan in the previous
election. Lokendra (PW-1) was also a member of the Gram
Panchayat and he supported Vimla Devi. He stated that
because of this, appellant Madan and others started keeping
internal enmity with them.
31. Lokendra (PW-1) also deposed that Mahipal, a witness
to this incident, was also murdered about two and half months
ago in the vicinity of the Jwalapur Police Station, Haridwar, in
which, Rajveer, Ramvir, Rambhajan, sons of Ishwar and
Ishwar were made the accused persons. He further stated that
because Rambhajan, Rajveer, Ramveer, Ompal and Devendra
alias Neetu were absconding from their homes since the
incident, they could not be caught. In his cross-examination,
it was put to him that in his Tehrir, it was not mentioned that
he was going with the other persons to the place of Rizwan.
However, the FIR is not an encyclopaedia of the entire incident.
36There are certain omissions in his evidence but they are not
material.
32. Irshad Khan (PW-7) is the father of deceased Rizwan
and Rihan. Rizwan was Deputy Pradhan of the village at that
time. Irshad Khan (PW-7), in his deposition, has stated that,
on the date of the incident, when he along with his wife
Mehmoona Begum and his sons Rizwan and Rihan were
present in his house, suddenly Ram Kishan entered his house
in an injured condition. He stated that Ram Kishan was
followed by Ishwar, Madan, Rajveer, Ramveer, Rambhajan,
Kunwar Pal. He further stated that Madan’s brother-in-law
(sala) Ompal, Madan’s brother-in-law (Sadhu) Neetu, along
with Madan’s nephew had also entered in his house. He stated
that these people were carrying rifles, guns and pistols in their
hands. He further stated that the accused started shooting at
Ram Kishan inside the house. His sons Rizwan and Rihan
tried to defend Ram Kishan. However, they also shot at his
sons Rizwan and Rihan, who were trying to protect Ram
Kishan. He stated that Ram Kishan fell down on the spot. He
stated that he took Rizwan and Rihan to Dr. Bora’s hospital in
Shamli. However, after seeing them, the doctor declared them
37dead. He also narrates somewhat about the first incident. But
he cannot be said to be an eye witness with regard to the first
incident. His evidence was sought to be attacked on the
ground that after such a gruesome incident had happened, he
had not lodged any report with the police. However, in his
cross-examination itself, he has explained thus:
“Lokendra of my village told me that he would lodge
the report at the Police Station. There is no need for
you to go, so I did not feel the need to go to the Police
Station and for lodging Report. When I reached the
village, by that time the Police had not come to the
village. When I was going to Shamli, then Lokendra
went to the Police Station Babri to lodge the Report.”
33. Irshad Khan (PW-7) has specifically denied in his
cross-examination that at the time of incident, he had stayed
upstairs on the terrace.
34. It is further to be noted that the testimony of Lokendra
(PW-1) and Irshad Khan (PW-7) is consistent inasmuch as
even Lokendra (PW-1) stated that he had gone to the house of
Rizwan after Ram Kishan followed by the accused persons
went to the house of Rizwan. This is corroborated by the
testimony of Irshad Khan (PW-7) who stated thus:
“In our house, Lokendra came after the incident. I
told Lokendra about the incident. I told Lokendra
that these people have killed my sons in front of me.”
3835. PW-10 is Harpal Singh. He stated that on the day of
incident, he was on his way from his house towards the crime
scene to look for labourers. He stated that Rashid’s son was
going towards Mustafa’s house. He further stated that Ram
Kishan and Lokendra (PW-1), Sunil, Satendra, Sukhpal Singh
(PW-2), Jai Singh (PW-8) were coming 4-5 steps behind him.
He stated that all of a sudden, accused persons started firing.
He stated that Rambhajan, Ramveer, Kawarpal, Madan,
Rajveer, Ompal, Neetu, Sudesh were among those who fired.
He fairly admitted that he cannot attribute which weapon was
used by which accused. He stated that Satendra, Sunil and
Sukhpal Singh (PW-2) were shot when the accused opened
fire. He further stated that after going ahead, when Masooq
Ali came out of his house, he was also shot. He stated that
thereafter Ram Kishan ran towards the house of Deputy
Pradhan Rizwan. However, he cannot be an eye witness to the
second incident. He stated that he had taken cover of a wall.
He further stated that Sunil, Satendra and Masooq Ali died
due to firearm injuries. He stated that Sukhpal Singh (PW-2)
and Jai Singh (PW-8) have also received injuries. He fairly
stated that Ram Kishan, Rizwan and Rihan were also killed in
39the incident but he did not see them being murdered with his
own eyes. In the cross-examination, he has stated that he
loved his life and therefore, he ran forward and took cover of a
wall, hiding behind the wall of Amanullah’s house. He stated
that the doors of Amanullah’s house were open and by
entering through the doors, he had taken cover of the wall. He
stated that he was behind the wall as long as the firing went
on. He stated that when the miscreants left the street, he came
out.
36. PW-11 is Sudhir. He stated that on the day of
incident, he had gone from his house towards the locality of
the Pathans. He stated that he saw Ram Kishan, Sukhpal
Singh (PW-2), Satendra, Sunil, Jai Singh (PW-8) going in the
street in front of him, in front of Mustafa’s house. At that time,
the accused persons who were having rifles and pistols in their
hands, opened fire at Ram Kishan, Sunil, Satendra and
Sukhpal Singh (PW-2). Satendra and Sunil fell on the spot as
soon as a shot was fired and Sukhpal Singh (PW-2) also fell as
soon as he was shot. Ram Kishan was shot in the legs and he
ran towards Rizwan’s house to escape. All the accused
persons ran after him. He stated that he also came to know
40that Ram Kishan, Rizwan and Rihan had also been killed by
the accused persons. Though this witness is also cross-
examined at length, nothing damaging insofar as the main
incident is concerned, could be elicited in his testimony.
37. The testimony of these witnesses is sought to be
attacked on the ground that they are interested witnesses and
there are inconsistencies in their evidence.
38. We may gainfully refer to the observations of this
Court in the case of Piara Singh and Others v. State of
Punjab5, which read thus:
“4. …….It is well settled that the evidence of
interested or inimical witnesses is to be scrutinised
with care but cannot be rejected merely on the
ground of being a partisan evidence. If on a perusal
of the evidence the court is satisfied that the evidence
is credit-worthy there is no bar in the Court relying
on the said evidence. The High Court was fully alive
to these principles and has in fact found that the
evidence of these three witnesses has a ring of truth.
After having perused the evidence ourselves also we
fully agree with the view taken by the High
Court……..”
39. It can thus be seen that merely because some of the
witnesses are interested or inimical witnesses, their evidence
cannot be totally discarded. The only requirement is that their
5 (1977) 4 SCC 452
41evidence has to be scrutinized with greater care and
circumspection. In the present case, both the High Court and
the trial court have meticulously scrutinized the evidence and
found the testimony of the eye witnesses trustworthy and
reliable. We have ourselves scrutinized their evidence as
discussed hereinabove. We find that merely because there are
certain inconsistencies in the evidence of the witnesses, their
evidence cannot be discarded.
40. It will also be gainful to refer to the observations of
this Court in the case of Waman and Others v. State of
Maharashtra6, wherein this Court has surveyed the earlier
judgments on the issue and held that if the evidence of
interested witnesses is found to be consistent and true, the
fact of being a relative, cannot by itself discredit their evidence.
41. It is further to be noted that all these witnesses are
rustic villagers. In this respect, it will be relevant to refer to
the observations of this Court in the case of State of Uttar
Pradesh v. Krishna Master and Others7, which read thus:
“24. The basic principle of appreciation of evidence of
a rustic witness who is not educated and comes from
a poor strata of society is that the evidence of such a
6 (2011) 7 SCC 295
7 (2010) 12 SCC 324
42witness should be appreciated as a whole. The rustic
witness as compared to an educated witness is not
expected to remember every small detail of the
incident and the manner in which the incident had
happened more particularly when his evidence is
recorded after a lapse of time. Further, a witness is
bound to face shock of the untimely death of his near
relative(s). Therefore, the court must keep in mind all
these relevant factors while appreciating evidence of
a rustic witness.”
42. We are of the considered view that insofar as the first
incident is concerned, the prosecution has duly proved its case
beyond reasonable doubt in view of the testimony of Lokendra
(PW-1) being duly corroborated by the testimonies of Harpal
Singh (PW-10) and Sudhir (PW-11). We are of the considered
view that the testimonies of these witnesses duly establish that
these witnesses have witnessed the firing on Satendra, Sunil
and Masooq Ali, who died on the spot. These witnesses have
also seen the accused persons assaulting Ram Kishan and
Sukhpal Singh (PW-2) who had received the firearm injuries,
who ran to the house of Rizwan to take shelter.
43. We are further of the considered view that though
Irshad Khan (PW-7) is a sole witness insofar as the firing on
deceased Ram Kishan, Rizwan and Rihan is concerned, his
testimony is cogent, reliable and trustworthy and can be made
43basis for coming to a conclusion that it is the present
appellants along with other accused who have caused the
death of deceased Ram Kishan, Rizwan and Rihan. In any
case, his testimony is duly corroborated by the evidence of
Lokendra (PW-1) who had immediately come to the second
spot after the occurrence of the incident when Irshad Khan
(PW-7) informed Lokendra (PW-1) about the incident occurring
in his house.
44. The next contention raised on behalf of the appellants
is that the motive attributed by the prosecution is a very weak
motive. It is submitted that the motive attributed is on
account of political enmity due to elections which were held
two and half years prior to the date of incident. The motive is
specifically brought on record in the evidence of Lokendra (PW-
1) and Irshad Khan (PW-7). Harpal Singh (PW-10) also
deposed about the enmity between the families of Ishwar and
Ram Kishan. In any case, the present case is a case of direct
evidence. It is a settled law that though motive could be an
important aspect in a case based on circumstantial evidence,
in the case of direct evidence, the motive would not be that
relevant. In this respect, we may gainfully refer to the
44judgment of this Court in the case of State of Andhra
Pradesh v. Bogam Chandraiah and Another8, which reads
thus:
“11. …..Another failing in the judgment is that the
High Court has held that the prosecution has failed
to prove adequate motive for the commission of the
offence without bearing in mind the well settled rule
that when there is direct evidence of an acceptable
nature regarding the commission of an offence the
question of motive cannot loom large in the mind of
the court. ……”
45. This Court, in the case of Darbara Singh v. State of
Punjab9, has observed thus:
“15. So far as the issue of motive is concerned, it is a
settled legal proposition that motive has great
significance in a case involving circumstantial
evidence, but where direct evidence is available,
which is worth relying upon, motive loses its
significance…….”
46. Again in the case of Subodh Nath and Another v.
State of Tripura10, this Court has observed thus:
“16. …….The learned counsel for the appellants is
right that the prosecution has not been able to
establish the motive of Appellant 1 to kill the
deceased but as there is direct evidence of the
accused having committed the offence, motive
becomes irrelevant. Motive becomes relevant as an
8 (1986) 3 SCC 637
9 (2012) 10 SCC 476
10 (2013) 4 SCC 122
45additional circumstance in a case where the
prosecution seeks to prove the guilt by
circumstantial evidence only.”
47. Another submission on behalf of the appellants is
with regard to faulty investigation. No doubt that there have
been certain lacunae in the police investigation. However, the
evidence of eye witnesses is consistent, reliable, trustworthy
and cogent. Merely because there are certain lacunae in the
investigation, it cannot be a ground to disbelieve the testimony
of eye-witnesses. In this respect, we may refer to the
observations of this Court in the case of Karnel Singh v.
State of M.P.11, which read thus:
“5. Notwithstanding our unhappiness regarding the
nature of investigation, we have to consider whether
the evidence on record, even on strict scrutiny,
establishes the guilt. In cases of defective
investigation the court has to be circumspect in
evaluating the evidence but it would not be right in
acquitting an accused person solely on account of the
defect; to do so would tantamount to playing into the
hands of the investigating officer if the investigation
is designedly defective. ………”
48. A similar view has been taken by this Court in the
case of Shera Singh v. State of Punjab12.
11 (1995) 5 SCC 518
12 (1996) 10 SCC 330
4649. In totality of the circumstances, we are of the
considered view that the prosecution has proved beyond
reasonable doubt the case for conviction under Section 302 of
IPC and the appeals in that regard are liable to be rejected.
50. The next questions that we are called upon to consider
are, as to whether the present case falls in the category of
rarest of rare cases, and as to whether on the facts of the
present case, the capital punishment imposed on appellant-
Madan deserves to be maintained or not?
51. The Constitution Bench in the case of Bachan Singh
v. State of Punjab13, observed thus:
“164. Attuned to the legislative policy delineated in
Sections 354(3) and 235(2), propositions (iv)(a) and
(v)(b) in Jagmohan [(1973) 1 SCC 20 : 1973 SCC (Cri)
169 : (1973) 2 SCR 541] shall have to be recast and
may be stated as below:
“(a) The normal rule is that the offence of
murder shall be punished with the
sentence of life imprisonment. The court
can depart from that rule and impose the
sentence of death only if there are special
reasons for doing so. Such reasons must
be recorded in writing before imposing the
death sentence.
(b) While considering the question of
sentence to be imposed for the offence of
murder under Section 302 of the Penal
Code, the court must have regard to every
13 (1980) 2 SCC 684
47relevant circumstance relating to the
crime as well as the criminal. If the court
finds, but not otherwise, that the offence
is of an exceptionally depraved and
heinous character and constitutes, on
account of its design and the manner of its
execution, a source of grave danger to the
society at large, the court may impose the
death sentence.””
52. It can thus be seen that the Constitution Bench held
that the normal rule is that the offence of murder shall be
punished with the sentence of life imprisonment. The court
can depart from that rule and impose the sentence of death
only if there are special reasons for doing so. Such reasons are
required to be recorded in writing before imposing the death
sentence. While considering such a question, the court must
have regard to every relevant circumstance relating to the
crime as well as the criminal. If the court finds, but not
otherwise, that the offence is of an exceptionally depraved and
heinous character and constitutes, on account of its design
and the manner of its execution, a source of grave danger to
the society at large, the court may impose the death sentence.
4853. It may further be relevant to refer to the following
observations of this Court in the case of Bachan Singh
(supra):
“202. Drawing upon the penal statutes of the States
in U.S.A. framed after Furman v. Georgia [33 L Ed 2d
346 : 408 US 238 (1972)] , in general, and clauses 2
(a), (b), (c) and (d) of the Penal Code, 1860
(Amendment) Bill passed in 1978 by the Rajya
Sabha, in particular, Dr Chitale has suggested these
“aggravating circumstances”:
“Aggravating circumstances: A court may,
however, in the following cases impose the
penalty of death in its discretion:
(a) if the murder has been committed after
previous planning and involves extreme
brutality; or
(b) if the murder involves exceptional
depravity; or
(c) if the murder is of a member of any of
the armed forces of the Union or of a
member of any police force or of any public
servant and was committed—
(i) while such member or public
servant was on duty; or
(ii) in consequence of anything
done or attempted to be done by
such member or public servant
in the lawful discharge of his
duty as such member or public
servant whether at the time of
murder he was such member or
public servant, as the case may
be, or had ceased to be such
member or public servant; or
(d) if the murder is of a person who had
acted in the lawful discharge of his duty
49under Section 43 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, or who had rendered
assistance to a Magistrate or a police
officer demanding his aid or requiring his
assistance under Section 37 and Section
129 of the said Code.””
54. In the case of Machhi Singh and Others v. State of
Punjab14, this Court laid down certain propositions which are
required to be taken into consideration. The Court observed
thus:
“32. The reasons why the community as a whole does
not endorse the humanistic approach reflected in
“death sentence-in-no-case” doctrine are not far to
seek. In the first place, the very humanistic edifice is
constructed on the foundation of “reverence for life”
principle. When a member of the community violates
this very principle by killing another member, the
society may not feel itself bound by the shackles of
this doctrine. Secondly, it has to be realized that
every member of the community is able to live with
safety without his or her own life being endangered
because of the protective arm of the community and
on account of the rule of law enforced by it. The very
existence of the rule of law and the fear of being
brought to book operates as a deterrent for those who
have no scruples in killing others if it suits their ends.
Every member of the community owes a debt to the
community for this protection. When ingratitude is
shown instead of gratitude by “killing” a member of
the community which protects the murderer himself
from being killed, or when the community feels that
for the sake of self-preservation the killer has to be
14 (1983) 3 SCC 470
50killed, the community may well withdraw the
protection by sanctioning the death penalty. But the
community will not do so in every case. It may do so
“in rarest of rare cases” when its collective conscience
is so shocked that it will expect the holders of the
judicial power centre to inflict death penalty
irrespective of their personal opinion as regards
desirability or otherwise of retaining death penalty.
The community may entertain such a sentiment
when the crime is viewed from the platform of the
motive for, or the manner of commission of the crime,
or the anti-social or abhorrent nature of the crime,
such as for instance:
I. Manner of commission of murder
33. When the murder is committed in an extremely
brutal, grotesque, diabolical, revolting or dastardly
manner so as to arouse intense and extreme
indignation of the community. For instance,
(i) when the house of the victim is set
aflame with the end in view to roast him
alive in the house.
(ii) when the victim is subjected to
inhuman acts of torture or cruelty in order
to bring about his or her death.
(iii) when the body of the victim is cut into
pieces or his body is dismembered in a
fiendish manner.
II. Motive for commission of murder
34. When the murder is committed for a motive
which evinces total depravity and meanness. For
instance when (a) a hired assassin commits murder
for the sake of money or reward (b) a cold-blooded
murder is committed with a deliberate design in
order to inherit property or to gain control over
property of a ward or a person under the control of
the murderer or vis-a-vis whom the murderer is in a
51dominating position or in a position of trust, or (c) a
murder is committed in the course for betrayal of the
motherland.
III. Anti-social or socially abhorrent nature of the crime
35. (a) When murder of a member of a Scheduled
Caste or minority community etc., is committed not
for personal reasons but in circumstances which
arouse social wrath. For instance when such a crime
is committed in order to terrorize such persons and
frighten them into fleeing from a place or in order to
deprive them of, or make them surrender, lands or
benefits conferred on them with a view to reverse past
injustices and in order to restore the social balance.
IV. Magnitude of crime
36. When the crime is enormous in proportion. For
instance when multiple murders say of all or almost
all the members of a family or a large number of
persons of a particular caste, community, or locality,
are committed.
V. Personality of victim of murder
37. When the victim of murder is (a) an innocent
child who could not have or has not provided even an
excuse, much less a provocation, for murder (b) a
helpless woman or a person rendered helpless by old
age or infirmity (c) when the victim is a person vis-a-
vis whom the murderer is in a position of domination
or trust (d) when the victim is a public figure
generally loved and respected by the community for
the services rendered by him and the murder is
committed for political or similar reasons other than
personal reasons.”
5255. This Court, in the case of Machhi Singh (supra), after
referring to the Constitution Bench judgment in the case of
Bachan Singh (supra), observed thus:
“38. In this background the guidelines indicated
in Bachan Singh case [(1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC
(Cri) 580 : AIR 1980 SC 898 : 1980 Cri LJ 636] will
have to be culled out and applied to the facts of each
individual case where the question of imposing of
death sentence arises. The following propositions
emerge from Bachan Singh case [(1980) 2 SCC 684 :
1980 SCC (Cri) 580 : AIR 1980 SC 898 : 1980 Cri LJ
636] :
“(i) The extreme penalty of death need not
be inflicted except in gravest cases of
extreme culpability.
(ii) Before opting for the death penalty the
circumstances of the ‘offender’ also
require to be taken into consideration
along with the circumstances of the
‘crime’.
(iii) Life imprisonment is the rule and
death sentence is an exception. In other
words death sentence must be imposed
only when life imprisonment appears to be
an altogether inadequate punishment
having regard to the relevant
circumstances of the crime, and provided,
and only provided, the option to impose
sentence of imprisonment for life cannot
be conscientiously exercised having regard
to the nature and circumstances of the
crime and all the relevant circumstances.
(iv) A balance sheet of aggravating and
mitigating circumstances has to be drawn
53up and in doing so the mitigating
circumstances have to be accorded full
weightage and a just balance has to be
struck between the aggravating and the
mitigating circumstances before the
option is exercised.
39. In order to apply these guidelines inter alia the
following questions may be asked and answered:
(a) Is there something uncommon about
the crime which renders sentence of
imprisonment for life inadequate and calls
for a death sentence?
(b) Are the circumstances of the crime
such that there is no alternative but to
impose death sentence even after
according maximum weightage to the
mitigating circumstances which speak in
favour of the offender?
40. If upon taking an overall global view of all the
circumstances in the light of the aforesaid
proposition and taking into account the answers to
the questions posed hereinabove, the circumstances
of the case are such that death sentence is
warranted, the court would proceed to do so.”
56. This Court, in the case of Ramnaresh and Others v.
State of Chhattisgarh15, observed thus:
“76. The law enunciated by this Court in its recent
judgments, as already noticed, adds and elaborates
the principles that were stated in Bachan
Singh [(1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580] and
thereafter, in Machhi Singh [(1983) 3 SCC 470 : 1983
15 (2012) 4 SCC 257
54SCC (Cri) 681]. The aforesaid judgments, primarily
dissect these principles into two different
compartments—one being the “aggravating
circumstances” while the other being the “mitigating
circumstances”. The court would consider the
cumulative effect of both these aspects and normally,
it may not be very appropriate for the court to decide
the most significant aspect of sentencing policy with
reference to one of the classes under any of the
following heads while completely ignoring other
classes under other heads. To balance the two is the
primary duty of the court. It will be appropriate for
the court to come to a final conclusion upon
balancing the exercise that would help to administer
the criminal justice system better and provide an
effective and meaningful reasoning by the court as
contemplated under Section 354(3) CrPC.
Aggravating circumstances
(1) The offences relating to the commission of heinous
crimes like murder, rape, armed dacoity, kidnapping,
etc. by the accused with a prior record of conviction
for capital felony or offences committed by the person
having a substantial history of serious assaults and
criminal convictions.
(2) The offence was committed while the offender was
engaged in the commission of another serious
offence.
(3) The offence was committed with the intention to
create a fear psychosis in the public at large and was
committed in a public place by a weapon or device
which clearly could be hazardous to the life of more
than one person.
(4) The offence of murder was committed for ransom
or like offences to receive money or monetary
benefits.
(5) Hired killings.
55(6) The offence was committed outrageously for want
only while involving inhumane treatment and torture
to the victim.
(7) The offence was committed by a person while in
lawful custody.
(8) The murder or the offence was committed to
prevent a person lawfully carrying out his duty like
arrest or custody in a place of lawful confinement of
himself or another. For instance, murder is of a
person who had acted in lawful discharge of his duty
under Section 43 CrPC.
(9) When the crime is enormous in proportion like
making an attempt of murder of the entire family or
members of a particular community.
(10) When the victim is innocent, helpless or a person
relies upon the trust of relationship and social
norms, like a child, helpless woman, a daughter or a
niece staying with a father/uncle and is inflicted with
the crime by such a trusted person.
(11) When murder is committed for a motive which
evidences total depravity and meanness.
(12) When there is a cold-blooded murder without
provocation.
(13) The crime is committed so brutally that it pricks
or shocks not only the judicial conscience but even
the conscience of the society.
Mitigating circumstances
(1) The manner and circumstances in and under
which the offence was committed, for example,
extreme mental or emotional disturbance or extreme
provocation in contradistinction to all these
situations in normal course.
(2) The age of the accused is a relevant consideration
but not a determinative factor by itself.
56(3) The chances of the accused of not indulging in
commission of the crime again and the probability of
the accused being reformed and rehabilitated.
(4) The condition of the accused shows that he was
mentally defective and the defect impaired his
capacity to appreciate the circumstances of his
criminal conduct.
(5) The circumstances which, in normal course of life,
would render such a behaviour possible and could
have the effect of giving rise to mental imbalance in
that given situation like persistent harassment or, in
fact, leading to such a peak of human behaviour that,
in the facts and circumstances of the case, the
accused believed that he was morally justified in
committing the offence.
(6) Where the court upon proper appreciation of
evidence is of the view that the crime was not
committed in a preordained manner and that the
death resulted in the course of commission of
another crime and that there was a possibility of it
being construed as consequences to the commission
of the primary crime.
(7) Where it is absolutely unsafe to rely upon the
testimony of a sole eyewitness though the
prosecution has brought home the guilt of the
accused.
77. While determining the questions relatable to
sentencing policy, the court has to follow certain
principles and those principles are the loadstar
besides the above considerations in imposition or
otherwise of the death sentence.
Principles
(1) The court has to apply the test to determine, if it
was the “rarest of rare” case for imposition of a death
sentence.
57(2) In the opinion of the court, imposition of any other
punishment i.e. life imprisonment would be
completely inadequate and would not meet the ends
of justice.
(3) Life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence
is an exception.
(4) The option to impose sentence of imprisonment
for life cannot be cautiously exercised having regard
to the nature and circumstances of the crime and all
relevant considerations.
(5) The method (planned or otherwise) and the
manner (extent of brutality and inhumanity, etc.) in
which the crime was committed and the
circumstances leading to commission of such
heinous crime.”
57. Applying the aforesaid principles, as laid down by this
Court in the aforesaid judgments, it can be seen that in the
present case, the appellants along with other accused came
behind the innocent persons and exhorted and started firing
indiscriminately, firstly, in front of the house of Rashid. As a
result of which two persons namely Satendra and Sunil fell
down and died on the spot. When Masooq Ali, after hearing the
sound of firing, came out from his house, the accused persons
shot fire at him also. As a result, he also fell down. Ram
Kishan and Sukhpal Singh (PW-2) were also injured. The
injured Ram Kishan and Sukhpal Singh (PW-2) went towards
the house of Rizwan to save their lives. However, the
58appellants and the other accused followed them and went
inside the house of Rizwan and fired shot at Ram Kishan. As
a result, Ram Kishan died on the spot. The accused persons
also fired shot at Rizwan and Rihan who tried to protect Ram
Kishan. On their way to hospital, injured Masooq Ali, Rizwan
and Rihan also died. It could thus be clear that, six deaths
were caused on account of brutal firing by the appellants and
other accused persons. The entire village and the people
residing in the surrounding areas must have been shocked by
such heinous and gruesome act. Not only that, one of the eye
witnesses was also murdered during the pendency of the trial.
The terror of the appellants and other accused persons was of
such a high magnitude that even the witnesses who had
received grievous injuries did not support the prosecution case
and were required to be declared hostile. As such, we find that
four innocent persons were shot from behind. Two of them
succumbed on the spot and two, who received serious injuries,
tried to rush to the house of Rizwan to protect themselves.
One innocent person, after hearing the sound of firing, came
out and he was also brutally shot. Ram Kishan, who sought
shelter in Rizwan’s house and Rizwan and Rihan who tried to
59protect Ram Kishan were also brutally killed. We are therefore
of the considered view that the act of the appellants and the
other accused would certainly be the one which shocked the
collective conscience of the society and fall in the category of
rarest of rare cases.
58. The next question that we will be called upon to
answer is that, whether in the facts and circumstances of the
case, imposition of death penalty on the appellants, would be
warranted or not?
59. This Court, in the case of Swamy Shraddananda (2)
alias Murali Manohar Mishra v. State of Karnataka16, has
observed thus:
“90. Earlier in this judgment it was noted that in the
decision in Shri Bhagwan [(2001) 6 SCC 296 : 2001
SCC (Cri) 1095] there is a useful discussion on the
legality of remission in the case of life convicts. The
judgment in Shri Bhagwan [(2001) 6 SCC 296 : 2001
SCC (Cri) 1095] , in SCC para 22, refers to and quotes
from the earlier decision in State of M.P. v. Ratan
Singh [(1976) 3 SCC 470 : 1976 SCC (Cri) 428] which
in turn quotes a passage from the Constitution
Bench decision in Gopal Vinayak Godse [AIR 1961
SC 600 : (1961) 3 SCR 440] . It will be profitable to
reproduce here the extract from Ratan Singh [(1976)
3 SCC 470 : 1976 SCC (Cri) 428] : (SCC pp. 473-74,
para 4)
16 (2008) 13 SCC 767
60“4. As regards the first point, namely, that
the prisoner could be released
automatically on the expiry of 20 years
under the Punjab Jail Manual or the Rules
framed under the Prisons Act, the matter
is no longer res integra and stands
concluded by a decision of this Court
in Gopal Vinayak Godse v. State of
Maharashtra [AIR 1961 SC 600 : (1961) 3
SCR 440] , where the Court, following a
decision of the Privy Counsel in Pandit
Kishori Lal v. King Emperor [(1944-45) 72
IA 1 : AIR 1945 PC 64] observed as follows:
(AIR pp. 602-03, paras 4-5)
‘4. … Under that section a
person transported for life or
any other terms before the
enactment of the said section
would be treated as a person
sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment for life or for the
said term.
5. If so the next question is
whether there is any provision
of law whereunder a sentence
for life imprisonment, without
any formal remission by
appropriate Government, can
be automatically treated as one
for a definite period. No such
provision is found in the Penal
Code, Code of Criminal
Procedure or the Prisons Act. …
A sentence of transportation for
life or imprisonment for life
must prima facie be treated as
transportation or imprisonment
for the whole of the remaining
period of the convicted person's
natural life.’
61The Court further observed thus: (AIR pp.
603-04, paras 7-8)
‘7. … But the Prisons Act does
not confer on any authority a
power to commute or remit
sentences; it provides only for
the regulation of prisons and for
the treatment of prisoners
confined therein. Section 59 of
the Prisons Act confers a power
on the State Government to
make rules, inter alia, for
rewards for good conduct.
Therefore, the rules made
under the Act should be
construed within the scope of
the ambit of the Act. … Under
the said rules the order of an
appropriate Government under
Section 401, Criminal
Procedure Code, are a
prerequisite for a release. No
other rule has been brought to
our notice which confers an
indefeasible right on a prisoner
sentenced to transportation for
life to an unconditional release
on the expiry of a particular
term including remissions. The
rules under the Prisons Act do
not substitute a lesser sentence
for a sentence of transportation
for life.
8. … The question of remission
is exclusively within the
province of the appropriate
Government; and in this case it
is admitted that, though the
appropriate Government made
certain remissions under
Section 401 of the Code of
62Criminal Procedure, it did not
remit the entire sentence. We,
therefore, hold that the
petitioner has not yet acquired
any right to release.’
It is, therefore, manifest from the decision
of this Court that the Rules framed under
the Prisons Act or under the Jail Manual
do not affect the total period which the
prisoner has to suffer but merely amount
to administrative instructions regarding
the various remissions to be given to the
prisoner from time to time in accordance
with the rules. This Court further pointed
out that the question of remission of the
entire sentence or a part of it lies within
the exclusive domain of the appropriate
Government under Section 401 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure and neither
Section 57 of the Penal Code nor any Rules
or local Acts can stultify the effect of the
sentence of life imprisonment given by the
court under the Penal Code. In other
words, this Court has clearly held that a
sentence for life would ensure till the
lifetime of the accused as it is not possible
to fix a particular period the prisoner's
death and remissions given under the
Rules could not be regarded as a
substitute for a sentence of transportation
for life.”
(emphasis supplied)
Further, in para 23, the judgment in Shri
Bhagwan [(2001) 6 SCC 296 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 1095]
observed as follows: (SCC pp. 306-07)
“23. In Maru Ram v. Union of India [(1981)
1 SCC 107 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 112] a
Constitution Bench of this Court
reiterated the aforesaid position and
observed that the inevitable conclusion is
that since in Section 433-A we deal only
63with life sentences, remissions lead
nowhere and cannot entitle a prisoner to
release. Further, in Laxman
Naskar v. State of W.B. [(2000) 7 SCC 626
: 2000 SCC (Cri) 1431] , after referring to
the decision of Gopal Vinayak
Godse v. State of Maharashtra [AIR 1961
SC 600 : (1961) 3 SCR 440] , the Court
reiterated that sentence for ‘imprisonment
for life’ ordinarily means imprisonment for
the whole of the remaining period of the
convicted person's natural life; that a
convict undergoing such sentence may
earn remissions of his part of sentence
under the Prison Rules but such
remissions in the absence of an order of an
appropriate Government remitting the
entire balance of his sentence under this
section does not entitle the convict to be
released automatically before the full life
term if served. It was observed that though
under the relevant Rules a sentence for
imprisonment for life is equated with the
definite period of 20 years, there is no
indefeasible right of such prisoner to be
unconditionally released on the expiry of
such particular term, including
remissions and that is only for the purpose
of working out the remissions that the said
sentence is equated with definite period
and not for any other purpose.”
(emphasis supplied)
91. The legal position as enunciated in Pandit Kishori
Lal [(1944-45) 72 IA 1 : AIR 1945 PC 64] , Gopal
Vinayak Godse [AIR 1961 SC 600 : (1961) 3 SCR 440]
, Maru Ram [(1981) 1 SCC 107 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 112]
, Ratan Singh [(1976) 3 SCC 470 : 1976 SCC (Cri)
428] and Shri Bhagwan [(2001) 6 SCC 296 : 2001
SCC (Cri) 1095] and the unsound way in which
remission is actually allowed in cases of life
imprisonment make out a very strong case to make a
64special category for the very few cases where the
death penalty might be substituted by the
punishment of imprisonment for life or imprisonment
for a term in excess of fourteen years and to put that
category beyond the application of remission.
92. The matter may be looked at from a slightly
different angle. The issue of sentencing has two
aspects. A sentence may be excessive and unduly
harsh or it may be highly disproportionately
inadequate. When an appellant comes to this Court
carrying a death sentence awarded by the trial court
and confirmed by the High Court, this Court may
find, as in the present appeal, that the case just falls
short of the rarest of the rare category and may feel
somewhat reluctant in endorsing the death sentence.
But at the same time, having regard to the nature of
the crime, the Court may strongly feel that a sentence
of life imprisonment subject to remission normally
works out to a term of 14 years would be grossly
disproportionate and inadequate. What then should
the Court do? If the Court's option is limited only to
two punishments, one a sentence of imprisonment,
for all intents and purposes, of not more than 14
years and the other death, the Court may feel
tempted and find itself nudged into endorsing the
death penalty. Such a course would indeed be
disastrous. A far more just, reasonable and proper
course would be to expand the options and to take
over what, as a matter of fact, lawfully belongs to the
Court i.e. the vast hiatus between 14 years'
imprisonment and death. It needs to be emphasised
that the Court would take recourse to the expanded
option primarily because in the facts of the case, the
sentence of 14 years' imprisonment would amount to
no punishment at all.
93. Further, the formalisation of a special category of
sentence, though for an extremely few number of
cases, shall have the great advantage of having the
death penalty on the statute book but to actually use
it as little as possible, really in the rarest of rare
cases. This would only be a reassertion of the
65Constitution Bench decision in Bachan Singh [(1980)
2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580 : AIR 1980 SC 898]
besides being in accord with the modern trends in
penology.
94. In the light of the discussions made above we are
clearly of the view that there is a good and strong
basis for the Court to substitute a death sentence by
life imprisonment or by a term in excess of fourteen
years and further to direct that the convict must not
be released from the prison for the rest of his life or
for the actual term as specified in the order, as the
case may be.”
60. It can thus be seen that the Court found that there
might be certain cases wherein the Court may feel that the
case just falls short of the rarest of the rare category and may
feel somewhat reluctant in endorsing the death sentence. But
at the same time, having regard to the nature of the crime, the
Court may strongly feel that a sentence of life imprisonment
subject to remission which normally works out to a term of 14
years would be grossly disproportionate and inadequate. The
Court held that the Court cannot be limited only to two
punishments, one a sentence of imprisonment, for all intents
and purposes, of not more than 14 years and the other death.
It has been held that a far more just, reasonable and proper
course would be to expand the options and to take over what,
as a matter of fact, lawfully belongs to the Court i.e. the vast
66hiatus between 14 years' imprisonment and death. It has been
held that the Court would be entitled to substitute a death
sentence by life imprisonment or by a term in excess of
fourteen years and further to direct that the convict must not
be released from the prison for the rest of his life or for the
actual term as specified in the order.
61. This Court, in the case of Shankar Kisanrao Khade
v. State of Maharashtra17, after referring to various cases,
adopted the middle path and commuted the death penalty into
sentence for the rest of the life without remission. Further, in
some of the cases, it was directed that only after the convict
undertook sentence for a fixed period as directed without
remission, his case for premature release could be considered.
62. This Court, in the case of Gandi Doddabasappa
alias Gandhi Basavaraj v. State of Karnataka18, wherein
the accused had committed murder of his daughter, who was
in the advanced stage of pregnancy, though upheld the
conviction of the accused under Section 302 IPC, nevertheless
17 (2013) 5 SCC 546
18 (2017) 5 SCC 415
67commuted the sentence from capital punishment to
imprisonment for life.
63. In the case of Prakash Dhawal Khairnar
(Patil) v. State of Maharashtra19, the appellant was a Senior
Scientific Assistant. He wiped out his brother's entire family.
This Court found that this was done by him on account of
frustration as his brother was not partitioning the alleged joint
property. Though this Court held that the crime was heinous
and brutal, but it could not be considered to be ‘rarest of rare’
case. This Court held that, it is difficult to hold that appellant
is a menace to the society and that there is no reason to believe
that he cannot be reformed or rehabilitated. The Court,
considering the facts and circumstances of the case, set aside
the death sentence and directed that he shall suffer
imprisonment for life but shall not be released unless he
served at least 20 years of imprisonment including the period
already undergone by him.
64. In the case of Mohinder Singh v. State of Punjab20,
this Court observed thus:
19 (2002) 2 SCC 35
20 (2013) 3 SCC 294
68“25. It is well-settled law that awarding of life
sentence is a rule and death is an exception. The
application of the “rarest of rare” cases principle is
dependent upon and differs from case to case.
However, the principles laid down and reiterated in
various decisions of this Court show that in a
deliberately planned crime, executed meticulously in
a diabolic manner, exhibiting inhuman conduct in a
ghastly manner, touching the conscience of everyone
and thereby disturbing the moral fibre of the society,
would call for imposition of the capital punishment
in order to ensure that it acts as a deterrent. While
we are convinced that the case of the prosecution
based on the evidence adduced confirms the
commission of offence by the appellant, however, we
are of the considered opinion that still the case does
not fall within the four corners of the “rarest of rare”
cases.”
65. In the said case, the accused had committed murder
of his wife and daughter. However, this Court observed that in
the facts and circumstances, it could not be said that
imposition of death penalty was the only alternative and
commuted the order of death sentence confirmed by the High
Court to life imprisonment.
66. Recently, this Court, in the case of Sundar @
Sundarrajan v. State by Inspector of Police21, held that
‘rarest of rare’ doctrine does not require that in such a case
only death sentence has to be imposed. This Court held that,
21 2023 SCC OnLine SC 310
69while considering as to whether the death sentence is to be
inflicted or not, the Court will have to consider not only the
grave nature of crime but also as to whether there was a
possibility of reformation of a criminal.
67. It is a settled position of law that, while sentencing,
the Court is not required to apply only the ‘crime test’ but also
the ‘criminal test’.
68. This Court, in the present case, vide order dated 16th
March 2023, had called for the Probation Officer’s Report,
Prison Conduct Report and Psychological Assessment Report.
69. As per the Prison Conduct Report submitted by the
Superintendent, District Jail, Baghpat, appellant Madan is
currently 64 years old. He has been in prison for 18 years 3
months. During this entire duration, he has no history of any
kind of prison offence. The Report further shows that he has
not been involved in any form of quarrels or fights in prison.
The Report shows that he has cordial relations with other
prisoners in his barrack and follows the prison rules. The
Report shows that he spends his time engaging in constructive
activities, such as playing games and reading books. He
70observes the prison timings and assists the prison
administration as well.
70. The IHBAS has also submitted appellant Madan’s
Psychological Assessment Report. As per the said Report,
appellant Madan is maintaining his daily activities adequately
and his socio-occupational functioning is unaffected except
occasional forgetfulness which could be age related. As per
the said Report, appellant Madan has voluntarily taken up
tasks in prison to keep himself occupied. He has also taken
up responsibilities to help younger prisoners to lead a better
life in prison.
71. This Court, in the case of Rajendra Pralhadrao
Wasnik v. State of Maharashtra22, after referring to various
earlier judgments, has held that in awarding death penalty, it
is mandatory that the probability that the convict can be
reformed and rehabilitated in the society, must be seriously
and earnestly considered. It has been held that it is one of the
mandates of the “special reasons” requirement of Section
354(3) Cr.P.C. This Court, in the cases of Bachan Singh
22 (2019) 12 SCC 460
71(supra), Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v. State
of Maharashtra23, Chhannu Lal Verma v. State of
Chhattisgarh24, Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik (supra) and
Manoj and Others v. State of Madhya Pradesh25,
consistently held that it is the obligation of the prosecution to
prove to the Court through evidence that there is a probability
that the convict cannot be reformed or rehabilitated.
Undisputedly, the prosecution has not placed any material in
that regard either before the trial court or the Appellate Court.
Per contra, the Reports by the Jail Authorities and IHBAS
would show that there is a possibility of the appellant being
reformed.
72. No doubt that there is a history of previous conviction
insofar as appellant Madan is concerned. However, this
Court, in the case of Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik (supra),
has held that the history of the convict by itself cannot be a
ground for awarding him death penalty.
73. As discussed hereinabove, the appellant is of an
advanced age. This Court, in the case of Babasaheb Maruti
23 (2009) 6 SCC 498
24 (2019) 12 SCC 438
25 (2023) 2 SCC 353
72Kamble v. State of Maharashtra26, has held that advance
age is one of the mitigating circumstances in favour of the
convict.
74. This Court, in the case of Irappa Siddappa
Murgannavar v. State of Karnataka27, has held that the
period of incarceration while sitting in a death row is also one
of the mitigating circumstances. In the present case, convict
Madan has been incarcerated for a period of 18 years 3
months.
75. This Court, in the case of Mohinder Singh (supra),
has held that the fact that the prisoner has displayed good
behaviour in prison, certainly goes on to show that he is not
beyond reform.
76. Taking into consideration all these factors, we find
that the present case is not a case wherein it can be held that
imposition of death penalty is the only alternative. Another
reason that weighs with us is that from the evidence of the
witnesses, it is clear that the role attributed to all the accused
persons has been similar. The evidence of witnesses would
26 (2019) 13 SCC 640
27 (2022) 2 SCC 801
73show that the role attributed is that all the accused persons
including both the appellants herein had fired shots and
indiscriminately indulged in the said firing. The trial court
imposed capital sentence on appellants Madan and Sudesh
Pal. However, insofar as accused Ishwar is concerned, though
the evidence against him is on similar lines, he was sentenced
to life imprisonment. The High Court, on the basis of the same
evidence, though confirmed the death penalty insofar as
appellant Madan is concerned, partly allowed the appeal of
Sudesh Pal and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment.
A perusal of the judgment of the High Court would reveal that
the only distinction drawn by the High Court between the
cases of Sudesh Pal and Madan is the additional factor that
Madan was already awarded life imprisonment in another
case. As already observed hereinabove, this Court, in the case
of Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik (supra), has held that past
conduct does not necessarily have to be taken into
consideration while imposing death penalty. At the cost of
repetition, the role attributed in the evidence of the eye
witnesses is identical to all the accused. In that view of the
matter, we find that the High Court was not justified in
74imposing death penalty on appellant Madan while converting
the death penalty imposed upon Sudesh Pal to life
imprisonment. If the judgment of the High Court is
maintained, it would lead to an anomalous situation. Whereas
appellant Sudesh Pal would be entitled for consideration of his
case for remission and pre-mature release on completion of a
particular number of years in accordance with the relevant
rules, appellant Madan will have to face death penalty.
77. We are of the considered view that the present case
would fall in the middle path as laid down in the case of
Swamy Shraddananda (2) alias Murali Manohar Mishra
(supra), followed by this Court in various judgments. We find
that the interest of justice would be met by converting death
penalty into life imprisonment i.e. actual imprisonment for a
period of 20 years without remission.
78. In the result, the appeals are disposed with the
following directions:
(i) Criminal Appeal No.1790 of 2017 filed by appellant
Sudesh Pal is dismissed;
75(ii) Criminal Appeal Nos. 1381-1382 of 2017 filed by
appellant Madan are partly allowed. Conviction under
Section 302 of IPC is confirmed insofar as appellant
Madan is concerned. However, death penalty imposed
on him is converted into imprisonment for a fixed term
of 20 years, including the period already undergone,
without remission;
(iii) In other words, the case of appellant Madan would not
be considered for pre-mature release unless he
completes the actual sentence of 20 years.
79. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of
in the above terms.
….……..….......................J.
[B.R. GAVAI]
.……..….........................J.
[B.V. NAGARATHNA]
……………..….........................J.
[PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA]
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 09, 2023.
76