NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1046 OF 2011
BHAGWAT Appellant(s)
VERSUS
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T
NAVIN SINHA, J.
1. The appellant stands convicted under Section 302
IPC and sentenced to life imprisonment for the death of
his wife at home by burn injuries on 06.04.2003. The
deceased expired the next day. The High Court acquitted
him of the charge under Section 498-A IPC regarding
dowry demand.
2. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that
1there is no eye witness to the occurrence. There were
three dying declarations at variance with each other.
Conviction has been erroneously based on the third
dying declaration merely because it was made in
presence of the Special Judicial Magistrate. Reliance
in support of the submission was placed on State of
Rajasthan v. Shravan Ram & Another, AIR 2013 SC 1890.
In the alternative it was submitted that the deceased
may have died on account of accidental burns while
cooking or brewing tea. The appellant may have
assaulted her under some grave provocation with regard
to some occurrence inside the house to which no one
else may have been privy. The appellant had also
suffered burn injuries on his left hand while
attempting to save the deceased. The deceased was taken
to the hospital by the appellant which is further proof
of his innocence. The conviction under Section 302 IPC
therefore deserves to be altered to one under Section
304-II IPC, if not acquittal.
3. Learned counsel for the State opposing the appeal
2submitted that the third dying declaration stands
proved by PW-7 the Special Judicial Magistrate, who had
recorded the same. PW-8, the Doctor who certified the
condition of the deceased at the relevant point of time
had also been examined. There was no evidence in
support of the submission that the deceased had died
either in an accidental fire or that the appellant may
have assaulted her under grave and sudden provocation.
4. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties,
we find that the conviction cannot be said to have been
based exclusively on the dying declaration made before
PW-7. Though there is no eye witness to the occurrence,
there is sufficient circumstantial evidence to hold
that the appellant alone was the assailant of the
deceased.
5. PW-1 Vijay and PW-9, both sons of the deceased have
consistently deposed that the appellant was addicted to
consuming liquor and in an inebriated condition, he
would often assault the deceased. On the date of the
occurrence, the two witnesses were asked by the
3appellant to go out of the room. The appellant closeted
himself with the deceased. Thereafter, the witnesses
heard shouts for help and when the door was opened they
saw their mother with burn injuries. The spot map
Exh.19 concluded that there was no evidence of any
firewood or fire in the kitchen for brewing tea or
cooking food. The High Court has appropriately observed
that if it was a case of accidental fire in the
kitchen, the burn injuries would primarily have been on
front portion of the body. The post-mortem report
Exh.21 noticed the following burn injuries on the
deceased:
Head face neck 9%
Back 18%
Back Upper Limbs 18%
Both Lower Limbs 34%
Anterior Chest upto
Umbilicus Deep Burns 11%
6. There is absolutely no material on record to
suggest any assault under grave and sudden provocation.
4The conduct of the appellant in absconding for
approximately three months from the date of the
occurrence, till he was taken into custody, was
contrary to normal human behavior and belies his claim
to innocence. It is not possible to accept the plea of
any burn injuries on his hands three months later. The
deceased died a homicidal death inside the matrimonial
home. In the circumstances noticed hereinbefore,
undoubtedly the appellant owed an explanation under
Section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872 with regard to
how the deceased had met a homicidal death inside the
house. He failed to discharge the onus completely. The
aforesaid, in our opinion, are sufficient to uphold the
conviction of the appellant.
7. Since an argument has been made with regard to
three inconsistent dying declarations, we consider it
only proper to deal with them also. The first dying
declaration, Exh.10 was recorded by a police officer at
the hospital. It speaks of an accidental fire. Though
it bears a seal of a medical officer below the
certification of fitness, it is not signed by anyone.
5Except for the policeman who recorded the same no
doctor has been examined in support of the same. The
second dying declaration stated to have been made
orally before her relatives Pw’s- 2,3 and 6 blamed the
appellant for having set her on fire, with an
additional statement of a dowry demand. The third dying
declaration Exh.27 also blamed the appellant for having
set the deceased on fire. It was recorded by PW-7, a
Special Judicial Magistrate who proved the same. PW-8,
the Doctor who certified the fitness and was present
during the same has also testified. We consider the
dying declaration, in the facts and circumstances of
the case, a corroborative material. The dying
declaration recorded by PW7 and proved by him certainly
commends to us for acceptance.
8. The first dying declaration is not only a
suspicious document, but it is also considered a self-
serving statement by the appellant, attributed to the
deceased for saving himself. If the statement had been
recorded in the hospital there is no reason why the
6doctor in whose presence it may have been recorded, not
to have initialed it and deposed in support of the
same. The 2nd dying declaration is oral in nature made
before the relatives of the deceased, which may be
considered self-serving. In any event the appellant has
been acquitted of the charge under Section 498A. The
third dying declaration has been duly proved by PW-7
and PW-8. We see no reason why it cannot be relied upon
as the truth.
9. In Harjit Kaur v. State of Punjab (1999) 6 SCC 545,
the deceased was stated to have made two inconsistent
dying declarations. The first declaration before the
police spoke of an accidental fire while the second
made before the sub-divisional magistrate blamed the
accused for setting the deceased on fire. Rejecting the
contention for acceptance of the first dying
declaration, it was observed as follows :
“7. It was then contended by the learned
counsel that this dying declaration
should not be accepted as true because
in her first dying declaration made to
the police officer on 30-4-1992,
Parminder Kaur had stated that she had
7received burns as a result of an
accident and that no one else was
responsible for the same. Both the
courts below after considering this
inconsistency have thought it fit to
rely upon the second dying declaration.
It has been rightly held as an attempt
on her part to save her husband and the
in-laws. The circumstance clearly
indicates that she was not a free person
then. The reasons given by the trial
court and the High Court for not
considering the first dying declaration
as voluntary and true are quite
convincing and we see no reason to
differ from them. Therefore, the second
dying declaration cannot be regarded as
untrue merely because it is contrary to
her statement made earlier. What she has
stated in the second dying declaration
appears to be more probable and
natural….”
10. In Shravan Ram (supra) relied upon by the learned
counsel for the appellant the dying declaration stated
to have been recorded by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate
was neither exhibited nor the Sub-Divisional Magistrate
was examined.
11. The conviction of the appellant therefore calls for
no interference. The appeal is dismissed.
812. We are informed that the appellant has completed
approximately 15 years of custody. If that be so, let
a copy of this order be forwarded to the Maharashtra
State Legal Services Authority so that necessary
assistance is made available to the appellant through
the concerned District Legal Services Authority with
regard to the consideration for remission in accordance
with law, if the appellant, so desires.
...................................................J.
(NAVIN SINHA)
...................................................J.
(K.M. JOSEPH)
New Delhi;
September 19, 2018
9