REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 902 OF 2007
TUKARAM & ORS. .. APPELLANT(S)
vs.
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA .. RESPONDENT(S)
WITH
CRIMINAL
APPEAL
NO. 1195
OF 2007
WITH
CRIMINAL
APPEAL
NO.
615 OF
2011
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.)No. 1935 of 2011)
O R D E R
As per the prosecution story the appellants and the
complainant party constituted two different groups in an
organization called the Dalit Mukti Sena. It appears that
both groups had been invited to the marriage of one Anil
Janjale on the 22nd May, 1995 which was performed at the
Shishu Mandir near the Railway Hospital. After themarriage the deceased Prakash was returning to his home
along with his friends Pradeep, Nana Mahajan (PW.2) and
others at about 11.00 p.m. As they came near the Hindi
Church all the accused followed them. Bhagwan Salve, since
deceased, and A.6 Jagan Sonawane were armed with iron
rods. Bhagwan Salve caught hold of the shirt of the
deceased whereupon the other accused assaulted him and hit
him by giving fist blows whereas A.5 Raju Suryawanshi who
-2-
was armed with a knife dealt a blow on the left buttock and
Bhagwan Salve and A.6 Jagan Sonawane hit him with iron rods
on the back and stomach. The deceased who was then
grievously injured was taken to the Railway Hospital wherePW.10 - Dr. Gangurde examined him and admitted him into the
Surgical Ward. His statement was recorded by PW.12-
P.I.Panwar and a case under Sections 147, 148, 324, 504 and
506 r/w 149 of the IPC was registered.
On the admission of the deceased, Dr. Gangurde
summoned Dr. Dhakate (PW.11) a Surgeon, who found an
injury on the buttocks which was stitched up the very same
evening. On the 24th, however, the patient developed signs
of internal bleeding and it was decided to perform an
operation. On opening the stomach it was found at that
stage that the intestines had been perforated at the
jejunum, the spleen too was ruptured and there was an
omental tear causing bleeding from the veins and about 100
c.c. foul smelling liquid was also found in the peritonial
cavity which was suctioned out. The Spleen was also removed
and the bleeding areas were ligatured. On the 5th June,1995 faecal matter was seen coming out from the stomach
which led to the bursting of the abdomen and as a
consequence thereof a second operation was performed on the
6th June, 1995 and it was at that stage noticed that the
buttock injury was 8.5 cms. deep and that a finger
inserted from the rectum could meet a finger inserted into
-3-
the perforation on the buttocks. Consequent to this
development the patient developed septicemia and pneumonia
and died on the 9th June, 1995 at about 2.00 p.m. A case
under Section 302 was registered against the accused. On
the completion of the investigation they were brought
to trial inter alia under Sections 147, 148 and 302/149 of
the IPC. The Trial Court relying on the eye witnessesaccount and the medical evidence convicted the accused for
offences punishable under Sections 302/149 etc. of the IPC
and sentenced them to various terms of imprisonment. An
appeal was, thereafter, taken to the High Court and the
High Court, has, while confirming the conviction, modified
the sentence to one under Section 304 (I) read with Section
149 of the IPC and maintained the sentences and conviction
under the other provisions of the IPC. In doing so the
High Court opined that there was no intention on the part
of the accused to cause death and the injury that they had
caused could be said to be likely to cause death. It is in
this situation the matter is now before us.
As already indicated above, a very limited relief
can be granted to the accused in this matter. We find from
the reading of the medical evidence that PW.11 Dr. Dhakate
at the very initial stage did not realize the gravity ofthe situation as he had seen only one injury on the person
of the deceased which was the external injury on the
buttocks as he did not even look at the possibility that
some internal injuries too could have been caused
considering the manner of the attack.
-4-
This comes out from the evidence of the doctors PWs.10 and
11. It is true that the Doctors have tried to cover up
their indifference and negligence by deposing that the
death could be attributed to the injury caused to the
abdominal organs but we are of the opinion that had the
Doctors been a little vigilant during the 20 days that the
deceased stood admitted to the hospital the possibility
that he could have been saved cannot be ruled out. In this
view of the matter we find that the accused are liable forconviction for an offence under Section 326/149 of the IPC
instead of Section 304(I) read with Section 149 of the
I.P.C.
The learned counsel for the State has however argued
that it was clear from the medical evidence that the
injuries had been caused not only by the fist blows but by
the beating with the iron rods as well. It has admittedly
been so stated by the eye witnesses but their depositions
are not supported by the medical reports which reflect only
an injury on the buttocks.
We are also told that as of today accused Nos. 1-4
who had given fist blow have under gone one year and 10
months of the sentence whereas A.5 who is said to have
caused the knife injury has undergone three years and 20
days of the sentence whereas A.6, one of those who had
caused an injury with an iron rod has undergone 2 years 11months. We therefore feel that the ends of justice would be
-5-
met if the sentence of all the accused is reduced to the
period already undergone.
The accused are accordingly held to be liable under
Section 326/34 of the I.P.C. Their sentence is reduced to
that already undergone. The appeals are disposed of
accordingly.
.................J.
(HARJIT SINGH BEDI)....................J.
(CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)
New Delhi,
February 24, 2011.