Crl.A. No. 1522 of 2007
1
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1522 OF 2007
STATE OF U.P. ..... APPELLANT
VERSUS
GARIBUDDI @ GARIBUDDIN & ORS. ..... RESPONDENTS
O R D E R
1. This appeal by way of special leave has been
filed by the State of U.P. impugning the judgment of
acquittal rendered by the High Court reversing the
judgment of conviction of the Additional Sessions Judge,
Allahabad dated 30th November, 1981, whereby the three
accused respondents had been convicted under Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to imprisonment
for life. It is by now well-settled that interference
by this Court in an order of acquittal should be minimal
and only in the circumstance that the judgment of the
High Court was completely perverse and did not arise out
of the evidence.Crl.A. No. 1522 of 2007
2
2. We have perused the judgment of the High Court
very carefully. Several reasons have been given by the
High Court for its decision. They are:
(i) that the identity of the assailants could not be
established as the incident had taken place at night and
though the oral evidence did indicate the presence of
lantern in the premises but the said lantern had neither
been shown in the site plan nor seized by the police,
and though the P.Ws. had deposed in their evidence in
Court that the accused had covered their heads only
whereafter they had been confronted with their
statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. that the full faces
had been muffled;
(ii) that the incident had been seen by a large number
of persons and that too from a distance of 20 paces and
as P.W. 2 Ram Niwas was living at some distance e he
could not have reached the place of incident to become
an eye witness as the incident had lasted for only 2
minutes;
(iii) that there was a gross enmity between the parties
as Garibuddin had lodged a report under Section 354 of
the IPC against the two eye witnesses viz. P.W. 1 RamCrl.A. No. 1522 of 2007
3
Shankar and P.W. 2 Ram Niwas; and
(iv) that the medical evidence did not support the
ocular version as pointed out by Dr. M.A. Haq who had
conducted the post mortem examination on the dead body.
3. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the High
Court's opinion that the accused were entitled to the
benefit of doubt cannot be faulted in the circumstances.
We, accordingly, dismiss the appeal.
.....................J
[HARJIT SINGH BEDI]
......................J
[GYAN SUDHA MISRA]
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 25, 2011.