REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1361 OF 2006
State of Madhya Pradesh …Appellant
Versus
Vishweshwar Kol …Respondent
O R D E R
This appeal, at the instance of the State of Madhya
Pradesh, arises out of the following facts:
The first wife of the respondent (hereinafter called “the
accused”), had died of tuberculosis and several years prior to
the date of occurrence (19th October 2003) he had started
living with Leelawati Bai deceased as a second wife. Out of
this arrangement, 4 daughters, namely, Sandhya about 6
years, Lovely 3 years, Madhu 1 year and Jyoti 10 or 11 years
had been born. As Leelawati Bai had abandoned her previous
husband and belonged to a community different from that of
the accused, she had not been accepted as a member of his
family and even otherwise there was suspicion that she wasCrl. Appeal No.1361/2006
2
not of good character. On the evening of 18th October 2003
the accused went to see a dance performance at Chandiya.
He, however, returned home at about 1.00 a.m. i.e. in the
early morning hours of 19th October 2003 before the
performance had ended and after picking up a plastic can
which contained kerosene oil, he poured the oil on his wife
and four daughters. Jyoti who was the eldest, woke up and
tried to escape but the accused got hold of her and in that
process, he too sustained burn injuries on his body. As a
consequence of the serious burn injuries, Leelawati Bai,
Sandhya, Lovely and Madhu died almost instanteously and
house was completely burnt down. Jyoti, who had sustained
severe injuries, was removed to the Primary Health Centre by
her uncle and brother of the accused, Nandi Kol PW-7 where
she was examined by Doctor Ashish Pandey, PW-1. The
Doctor also informed the police on which Sub-Inspector
S.K.Mishra, PW-10 reached the hospital and after ascertaining
from Dr. Ashish Pandey as to Jyoti’s fitness to make a
statement, recorded the same between 1.40 and 2.15 a.m.. InCrl. Appeal No.1361/2006
3
this dying declaration, she gave the story as already given
above. The accused was accordingly brought to trial for an
offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC on the
completion of the investigation. The trial court relying on the
dying declaration and partly on the evidence of Nandi Kol PW-
7 and Jognibai PW-8, the mother of the accused, held that the
fact that the accused and Leelawati Bai were living as a man
and wife had been proved on record. The court, however, held
that the story as to the motive for the burning of Leelawati Bai
and particularly her daughters could not be entirely accepted
as the witnesses aforesaid had resiled from their police
statements in an attempt to help the accused who was a very
close relative and accordingly the primary evidence against the
accused was the dying declaration made by Jyoti. The court
observed that this was the main link in the chain of
circumstances against the accused. It was pointed out that
the dying declaration had been recorded by PW-10 after the
Doctor had opined that Jyoti was fit to make a statement.
Support for the dying declaration was also found from theCrl. Appeal No.1361/2006
4
evidence of PW-4 Balwant, a medical assistant, who too had
been present in the Primary Health Centre. PW-10 also
deposed that no Executive Magistrate was posted at Chandiya
and as Jyoti was in a very serious condition it had not been
feasible to secure the services of an Executive Magistrate from
Umariya which was about one hour distant and that in any
case the wireless set at the Headquarters had been shut down
at midnight and the telephone too was not in working order.
PW-10 also explained that soon after the recording of the
dying declaration Jyoti too had died. The trial court observed
that a dying declaration to be more reliable and plausible
ought to be recorded by a Magistrate but if the circumstances
did not make that possible and a dying declaration was
recorded by a police officer and was found to be credible, there
was no law or practice that it could not be relied upon. The
trial court also noted that in the light of the fact that PWs.7
and 8, the brother and the mother of the accused, had resiled
from their statements though admittedly PW-7 had brought
Jyoti to the hospital, no other evidence could be produced asCrl. Appeal No.1361/2006
5
the incident had happened at 1 a.m., an extremely awkward
time. The court then took up the question of the sentence to
be awarded and held that the case fell within the rarest of the
rare category as four innocent girls between the ages of 1 and
10 and their mother had been murdered by their father only
because he had some strained relations with the mother. It
was found that the murders had been committed in an
excessively brutal manner. An appeal was thereafter taken to
the High Court and a reference was also made under Section
366 of the Cr.P.C. The High Court has, by the impugned
judgment, allowed the appeal and acquitted the accused,
thereby declining the murder reference. The High Court
analyzed the law relating to dying declarations and held that
such a statement could by itself form the basis for conviction
provided it inspired confidence and with this background
examined the dying declaration and gave a few rather unusual
reasons for discarding it; they being (1) that as per the dying
declaration, all victims had been sleeping when the oil had
been poured on them and the fire lit but if all (including Jyoti)Crl. Appeal No.1361/2006
6
were asleep, there was no question of Jyoti having seen the
incident; (2) that there was no smell of kerosene oil on the
dead bodies of the children which belied the story that
kerosene oil had first been poured on the victims and they had
subsequently been set afire and (3) that it appeared that a
bottle containing kerosene oil which was being used as a
crude lamp (chimney) appeared to have caused the fire and
that the story that the kerosene oil had been poured directly
on the victims was a concoction. The High Court also referred
to certain passages from Dr. Modi’s Medical Jurisprudence
and Toxicology to support its views. The State is in appeal
before us.
Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, the learned counsel for the State of
Madhya Pradesh, has argued that the three reasons given by
the High Court for making an order of acquittal were
completely unjustified, as they ignored the basic fact that the
dying declaration had been recorded within a very short time
of the incident and by PW-10 after getting a fitness certificate
from the Doctor who had given the certificate in the presenceCrl. Appeal No.1361/2006
7
of PW-4 Balwant, an employee of the hospital. She has
pointed out that realizing the gravity and urgency of the
situation and Jyoti’s serious condition, it had not been
possible to secure the services of a Magistrate from Umariya
which was some distance away and that PW-10 was thus fully
justified in recording the dying declaration. These pleas have
been controverted by Mr. Rajesh, the learned counsel for the
accused who has supported the judgment of the High Court.
We have gone through the evidence with the help of the
learned counsel and also examined the reasons which have
weighed with the High Court in rendering its judgment. With
great respect, we are unable to accept any of the reasons given
by the High Court. It has to be highlighted that a dying
declaration cannot be analyzed as if it were a statute and it
was only if the Court was to find that the injured was not in a
fit condition to make a statement or the possibility that it was
tutored or motivated or the story given was completely
unacceptable could be some of the reasons for discarding it. It
has come in Jyoti’s statement that her father had returnedCrl. Appeal No.1361/2006
8
home completely inebriated and before the dance performance
had ended is supported by PW-7 as well. Jyoti also stated that
the accused had walked to the kitchen and picked up a can of
kerosene oil and had first poured its contents on her mother
and thereafter on her and her siblings and then set them
ablaze. She further stated that she being the eldest had
managed to get up and had attempted to escape but she had
been got hold of by the accused with the result he too had
received burn injuries in that process. The fact that the
accused received burn injuries is corroborated by the medical
evidence.
We find absolutely no reason as to why the story given in
the dying declaration should not be believed. Admittedly,
Jyoti had been brought to the hospital by PW-7 and he so
admitted in his statement. Dr. Pandey, the attending doctor,
had immediately sent for the police which had brought PW-10
to the hospital and after ascertaining from the doctor as to
Jyoti’s fitness, the dying declaration had been recorded in the
presence of the doctor as also Balwant PW. The argumentCrl. Appeal No.1361/2006
9
that had found favour with the High Court that as the
presence of a chimney was conceded by the prosecution, it
appeared that the kerosene oil had spilt out after the chimney
had been accidentally broken and caused the burn injuries to
all the victims. This story is, however, not based on any
material but is an inference which does not flow from the
evidence. The question is as to the
sentence that is to be awarded in such a matter. The trial
court had rightly held that the incident was in the category of
the rarest of the rare cases. Nothing can be said in
exoneration of the accused on the facts of the case, and we are
constrained to hold that the High Court by rendering a
judgment which is completely against the evidence makes it
difficult for us to re-impose the capital sentence at this stage.
As already indicated above, the incident had happened in
October 2003. The trial court had convicted the accused
under Section 302 of the IPC and sentenced him to death vide
judgment dated 30th April 2004. The acquittal judgment was
rendered on the 6th December 2004. The accused has beenCrl. Appeal No.1361/2006
10
free on acquittal for more than 6 years now. In this view of the
matter, notwithstanding the horrendous nature of the crime
and that it called for the capital punishment, we find it
difficult to re-impose the death sentence on the accused at
this stage. We nevertheless give this opinion with regret. We
accordingly allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the
High Court dated 6th December 2004 and restore that of the
trial court in so far as the conviction under Section 302 of the
IPC in concerned, but direct the accused to undergo a
sentence of life imprisonment.
………………………………….J.
(HARJIT SINGH BEDI)
………………………………….J.
(CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)
JANUARY 18, 2011,
NEW DELHI.