1
NON­REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 14 OF 2019
[Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 5632 of 2014]
State of Madhya Pradesh .. Appellant
Versus
Kalyan Singh & Ors. .. Respondents
J U D G M E N T
M. R. Shah, J.
Leave granted.
1. Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned
judgment and order dated 29.7.2018 passed by the High Court of
Madhya Pradesh in Miscellaneous Criminal Case No. 6075 of
2013, by which the High Court has quashed the criminal
proceedings pending against the present Respondent herein by
Crime No. 23 of 2013 for the offences under Sections 307, 294
read Section 34 of the IPC registered at the Police Station2
Maharajpur, District Gwalior, the State of Madhya Pradesh has
preferred the present appeal.
2. That the Respondent No. 5 herein­the original Complainant
one Birbal Sharma filed a complaint against Respondent Nos. 1
to 4 herein­the original Accused for the offences under Sections
307, 294 read with Section 34 of the IPC. That the said
complaint was registered as Crime No. 23 of 2013 at the Police
Station Maharajpur, District Gwalior. It appears that the
original Accused filed an application for bail which came to
rejected by the learned Sessions Court and, thereafter, the
original Accused approached the High Court by filing the
Miscellaneous Criminal Case No. 6075 of 2013 under Section
482 of the Cr.PC and requested to quash the criminal
proceedings on the ground that the accused and the original
Complainant have settled the dispute amicably. That the
original Complainant submitted his affidavit stating that he has
amicably settled the subject­matter of the crime with the original
Accused and that he has no objection for dropping the criminal
proceedings. That, by the impugned judgment and order, the
High Court in exercise of power under Section 482 of the Cr.PC3
has quashed the criminal proceedings against the original
Accused which were for the offences under Sections 307, 294
read with Section 34 of the IPC, solely on the ground that the
original Complainant and Accused have settled the dispute and
the original Complainant does not want to prosecute the accused
and, therefore, there is no change of recording conviction against
the accused persons. At this stage, it is required to be noted
that the said application was opposed by the State observing that
the offences alleged against the accused are non­compoundable
offences and, therefore, even if there is any settlement between
the Complainant and the Accused, the complaint cannot be
quashed. However, despite the above, the High Court quashed
the criminal proceedings against the original Accused on the
ground that there is a settlement between the Complainant and
the original Accused and the original Complainant does not want
to prosecute the accused further.
2.1 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court quashing the
criminal proceedings against the accused for the offences under4
Sections 307, 294 read with Section 34 of the IPC, the State of
Madhya Pradesh has preferred the present appeal.
3. We have heard Shri Ms. Swarupama Chaturvedi, learned
Advocate appearing on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh,
Ms. Malini Poduval, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the
original Accused and perused the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court.
3.1 It is required to be noted that the original Accused was
facing the criminal proceedings under Sections 307, 294 read
with Section 34 of the IPC. It is not in dispute that as per
Section 20 of the Cr.PC offences under Sections 307, 294 read
with Section 34 of the IPC are non­compoundable. It is also
required to be noted that the allegations in the complaint for the
offences under Sections 307, 294 read with Section 34 of the IPC
are, as such, very serious. It is alleged that the accused fired
twice on the complainant by a country­made pistol. From the
material on record, it appears that one of the accused persons
was reported to be a hardcore criminal having criminal5
antecedents. Be that as it may, the fact remains that the
accused was facing the criminal proceedings for the offences
under Sections 307, 294 read with Section 34 of the IPC and that
the offences under these sections are not non­compoundable
offences and, looking to the serious allegations against the
accused, we are of the opinion that the High Court has
committed a grave error in quashing the criminal proceedings for
the offences under Sections 307, 294 read with Section 34 of the
IPC solely on the ground that the original Complainant and the
accused have settled the dispute. At this stage, the decision of
this Court in the case of Gulab Das and Ors. V. State of M.P.
(2011) 12 SCALE 625 is required to be referred to. In the said
decision, this Court has specifically observed and held that,
despite any settlement between the Complainant on the one hand
and the accused on the other, the criminal proceedings for the
offences under Section 307 of the IPC cannot be quashed, as the
offence under Section 307 is a non­compoundable offence.
Under the circumstance, the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court quashing the criminal proceedings6
against the original Accused for the offences under Sections 307,
294 read with Section 34 of the IPC cannot be sustained and the
same deserves to be quashed and set aside.
4. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the
present appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court in Miscellaneous Criminal Case No.
6075 of 2013 is hereby quashed and set aside. Consequently,
the criminal proceedings being Crime No. 23 of 2013 under
Sections 307, 294 read with Section 34 of the IPC registered at
Police Station Maharajpur, District Gwalior be proceeded further
in accordance with law and on its own merits.
……………………………….J.
(D. Y. CHANDRACHUD)
…………………………………J.
(M. R. SHAH)
New Delhi,
January 4, 2019.