1
REPORTABLE
THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 111 OF 2011
V. Ravi Kumar …Appellant
VERSUS
State, Rep. by Inspector of Police,
District Crime Branch, Salem,
Tamil Nadu & Ors. …Respondents
J U D G M E N T
Indira Banerjee, J.
This appeal is against the final judgment and order
dated 20-03-2006 passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Madras, inter alia, allowing Criminal
Original Petition No.27039 of 2005 filed under Section
482 Cr.P.C. and quashing the criminal proceedings being
Crime No.54 of 2005 against the petitioners before the
High Court and also against the first accused company,
which was not party before the High Court.2
2. The appellant, Shri Ravi Kumar carries on business
of cotton ginning and conversion of cotton into yarn at
Salem, Tamil Nadu as proprietor of “SARAVANA YARN
TRADERS”.
3. The appellant as proprietor of “SARAVANA YARN
TRADERS” entered into transactions with Sri. Rajendran
Mills Ltd., Salem (hereinafter referred to as “the Mill”).
The respondent No.2/accused No.2 is the Managing
Director of the Mill and the respondent No.3/accused
No.3 Sri Sundaram is its Chairman, respondent No.
4/accused No.4 Sri Sundar is the son of the Managing
Director being the respondent No.2/accused No.2 and is
in charge of the affairs of the Mill. The respondents/
accused Nos.5 to 13 are also responsible for
administering the Mill.
4. In December 2001, the Mill requested the appellant
to supply cotton lint to the Mill for conversion of the
same into yarn. The appellant and the respondents
entered into transactions in 2001. Later, in January
2002, a Memorandum of Understanding in writing was
executed between the appellant and the Mill.3
5. The appellant has alleged that pursuant to the
Memorandum of Understanding, the appellant supplied
1,03,920 Kgs of cotton lint to the Mill for conversion into
yarn. The appellant has further alleged that respondent
No.2/accused No.2 Shri Chokalingam had, from out of
the said quantity of cotton lint, purchased lint weighing
about 47,164 kgs of the value of Rs.26,93,289/- on
credit basis and the balance which was worth
Rs.35,26,561.69 had been entrusted to the Mill for
conversion into yarn.
6. According to the appellant, the Mill did not take any
step to convert the lint into yarn in spite of repeated
requests. The appellant later came to know that all the
accused had connived with each other and in criminal
breach of trust sold the entire cotton lint weighing about
1,08,920/- kgs of the value of about Rs.62,19,850.50 and
appropriated the sale proceeds thereof.
7. On 20-05-2004, the appellant lodged a complaint at
the Edapadi Police Station, Salem district against
respondents for offences under Sections 420 and 409
read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.4
8. As the Police failed to register any case, the
appellant invoked Section 156(3) of the Cr.P.C. to seek
orders of the learned Judicial Magistrate II, Sankagiri for
registration of the complaint.
9. Even after orders under Section 156(3) of the
Cr.P.C., the Police did not register any complaint.
Thereafter, the appellant filed a petition being Crl. O.P.
No.7715 of 2005 praying for direction on the Inspector of
Police to register a case on the basis of the complaint
made by the appellant.
10. It is stated that since the amount involved exceeded
the limit for invocation of the pecuniary jurisdiction of
the local Police Station, the Superintendent of Police
transferred the investigation to the District Crime Branch
and the same was registered as Crime No.54/2005
under Sections 420, 409 and 34 IPC on 22-06-2005.
11. According to the appellant, since the police did not
conduct the investigation properly, the appellant was
constrained to file Crl. O.P. No.23354 of 2005 in the High
Court of Madras for direction on the Investigation Officer
of Crime No.54 of 2005 to arrest the accused mentioned
in the FIR, complete the investigation and file a final5
report.
12. By an order dated 29-08-2005, the High Court
disposed of the criminal original petition by directing the
respondent to file a final Report within three months
from the date of receipt of a copy of the said order.
13. It is pleaded that as the Police could not complete
the investigation within three months as directed, it filed
Criminal Miscellaneous Petition being Crl.M.P. No.9149 of
2005 in Crl. O.P. No.23354 of 2005 for extension of time,
by a further period of six months, for completion of
investigation in Crime No.54 of 2005.
14. On 22-09-2005 respondent Nos.2 to 13 filed Crl.
O.P. 27039 of 2005 under Section 482 Cr.P.C. in the High
Court for quashing FIR No. 54 of 2005 alleging that the
allegations in the complaint did not prima facie make out
the offences for which the respondents had been
charged.
15. The respondent State filed its counter affidavit to
the aforesaid application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and
prayed that the said application be dismissed. In the
affidavit in opposition, it was contended that
investigation revealed that the accused persons had6
forged documents using blank letter head, papers and
cheque leaves of the appellant given to him before
entering into business transactions. As such ingredients
of Sections 468, 471, 420, 409 and 120 (b) IPC were to
be found. Furthermore, there was evidence that one of
the accused mentioned in the FIR namely Prasanna
Chakravarthy had deposed about the forged letter
prepared by him on the instruction of Kasi Viswanathan,
Meiyappan, Rajarathinam, and Jayapal.
16. On 18-10-2005, the appellant, as a de facto
complainant, filed an application numbered Crl.M.P.
No.8370 of 2005 for intervention in Crl. O. P.
No.27039/2005.
17. By an order dated 24-11-2005, the High Court
granted the police six months’ time for completing the
investigation in FIR No.54 of 2005 and for filing final
report therein.
18. On 30-11-2005, the High Court referred the matter
to the Conciliation and Mediation Centre for resolution of
the dispute between the parties, in the absence of the
appellant, being the complainant.7
19. The appellant opposed the conciliation proceedings
contending that the offences were non-compoundable
whereupon the case was again referred back to the High
Court for decision on merits.
20. By the impugned order dated 20-03-2006, the High
Court allowed the application under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
observing that the complainant had, without assigning
any reason, withdrawn the first complaint and launched
prosecution by filing a fresh complaint; that the
complaint arose out of a commercial transaction; and
that the complainant would have to approach the Civil
Court for recovering dues if at all arising out of
commercial transaction.
21. The short question in this appeal is whether the
High Court should have quashed the criminal
proceedings being Crime No.54 of 2005 on the grounds
that the appellant had withdrawn an earlier complaint
without assigning reasons; the transactions being
commercial in nature, the ingredients of an offence
under the Sections referred to above were absent; and
that the remedy of the appellant lay in filing a civil suit.8
22. There is no provision in the Criminal Procedure Code
or any other statute which debars a complainant from
making a second complaint on the same allegations,
when the first complaint did not lead to conviction,
acquittal or discharge. In Shiv Shankar Singh v. State
of Bihar and Anr.1, this Court held:
“18. Thus, it is evident that the law does not
prohibit filing or entertaining of the second
complaint even on the same facts provided the
earlier complaint has been decided on the basis of
insufficient material or the order has been passed
without understanding the nature of the complaint
or the complete facts could not be placed before
the court or where the complainant came to know
certain facts after disposal of the first complaint
which could have tilted the balance in his favour.
However, the second complaint would not be
maintainable wherein the earlier complaint has
been disposed of on full consideration of the case of
the complainant on merit.”
23. As held by this Court in Jatinder Singh and
Others v. Ranjit Kaur2, it is only when a complaint is
dismissed on merits after an inquiry, that a second
complaint cannot be made on the same facts. Maybe, as
contended by the respondents, the first complaint was
withdrawn without assigning any reason. However, that
in itself is no ground to quash a second complaint.
1 (2012) 1 SCC 130
2 2001 (2) SCC 5709
24. In Pramatha Nath Talukdar and Anr. v. Saroj
Ranjan Sarkar3, this Court dealt with the question
whether the second complaint by the respondent should
have been entertained when the previous complaint had
been withdrawn. The application under Section 482
Cr.P.C. was allowed and the complaint dismissed by the
majority Judges observing that an order of dismissal
under Section 203 Cr.P.C. was no bar to the
entertainment of second complaint on the same facts,
but it could be entertained only in exceptional
circumstances, for example, where the previous order
was passed on an incomplete record or a
misunderstanding of the nature of the complaint or the
order passed was manifestly absurd, unjust or foolish or
where there were new facts, which could not, with
reasonable diligence, have been brought on record in
previous proceedings.
25. In Poonam Chand Jain and Anr. v. Fazru4, this
Court relied upon its earlier decision in Pramatha Nath
(supra) and held that an order of dismissal of a complaint
was no bar to the entertainment of second complaint on
3 AIR 1962 SC 876
4 (2010) 2 SCC 63110
the same facts, but it could be entertained only in
exceptional circumstances, such as, where the previous
order was passed on incomplete record, or on a
misunderstanding of the nature of the complaint or was
manifestly absurd, unjust or foolish or where there were
new facts which could not, with reasonable diligence,
have been brought on the record in the previous
proceedings.
26. In Poonam Chand Jain (supra) this Court further
held that:-
“...this question again came up for consideration
before this Court in Jatinder Singh v. Ranjit Kaur.
There also this Court by relying on the principle in
Pramatha Nath held that there is no provisions in
the Code or in any other statute which debars a
complainant from filing a second complaint on the
same allegation as in the first complaint. But this
Court added when a Magistrate conducts an
enquiry under Section 202 of the Code and
dismisses a complaint on merits a second
complaint on the same facts could not be made
unless there are “exceptional cirumstances”. This
Court held in para 12, if the dismissal of the first
complainant then there is no bar in filing a second
complaint on the same facts. However, if the
dismissal of the complaint under Section 203 of the
Code was on merit the position will be different.”
27. In M/s Jayant Vitamins Ltd. v. Chaitanyakumar
and Another5 this Court held that in the absence of
5 (1992) 4 SCC 1511
compelling and justifiable reasons, it was not
permissible for the Court to stop investigation by
quashing an FIR.
28. In Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Limited and
Ors v. Mohd. Sharaful Haque and Another6 this
Court referred to State of Haryana and Ors. v.
Bhajan Lal and Ors.7 and summarized and illustrated
the category of cases in which power under Section 482
of the Criminal Procedure Code could be exercised. This
court observed and held:-
"(1) Where the allegations made in the first
information report or the complaint, even if they are
taken at their face value and accepted in their
entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or
make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information
report and other materials, if any, accompanying
the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence,
justifying an investigation by police officers under
Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of
a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of
the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in
the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in
support of the same do not disclose the commission
of any offence and make out a case against the
accused.
(4) Where the allegations in the FIR do not
constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only
6 2005 (1) SCC 122
7 (1992) Supp. 1 SCC 33512
a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is
permitted by a police officer without an order of a
Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of
the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or
complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable
on the basis of which no prudent person can ever
reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient
ground for proceeding against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in
any of the provisions of the Code or the Act
concerned (under which a criminal proceeding is
instituted) to the institution and continuance of the
proceedings and/or where there is a specific
provision in the Code or Act concerned, providing
efficacious redress for the grievance of the
aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly
attended with mala fide and/or where the
proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior
motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and
with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge."
29. There can be no doubt that a mere breach of
contract is not in itself a criminal offence, and gives rise to
the civil liability of damages. However, as held by this
Court in Mridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma and Ors. v.
State of Bihar and Anr.8, the distinction between mere
breach of contract and cheating, which is a criminal
offence, is a fine one. While breach of contract cannot
give rise to criminal prosecution for cheating, fraudulent or
8 (2000) 4 SCC 16813
dishonest intention is the basis of the offence of cheating.
In this case, in the FIR, there were allegations of
fraudulent and dishonest intention including allegations of
fabrication of documents, the correctness or otherwise
whereof can be determined only during trial when
evidence is adduced.
30. Exercise of the inherent power of the High Court
under Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code would
depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. It is
neither proper nor permissible for the Court to lay down
any straitjacket formula for regulating the inherent power
of the High Court under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.
31. Power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. might be exercised
to prevent abuse of the process of law, but only when, the
allegations, even if true, would not constitute an offence
and/or were frivolous and vexatious on their face.
32. Where the accused seeks quashing of the FIR,
invoking inherent jurisdiction of the High Court, it is wholly
impermissible for the High Court to enter into the factual
arena to adjudge the correctness of the allegations in the
complaint. Reference may be made to the decision of this
Court, inter alia, in State of Punjab v. Subhash Kumar14
and Ors.9 and Janata Dal v. H.S. Chowdhary and
Ors.10
33. In Vesa Holdings (P) Ltd. and Anr. v. State of
Kerala and Ors.11, this Court observed:
“12. The settled proposition of law is that every
breach of contract would not give rise to an offence
of cheating and only in those cases breach of
contract would amount to cheating where there was
any deception played at the very inception.”
13. It is true that a given set of facts may make out
a civil wrong as also a criminal offence and only
because a civil remedy may be available to the
complainant that itself cannot be a ground to quash
a criminal proceeding. The real test is whether the
allegations in the complaint disclose the criminal
offence of cheating or not.”
34. In Vesa Holding (P) Ltd. (supra), this Court found
that there was nothing to show that at the very inception
there was any intention on behalf of the accused persons
to cheat, which was a condition precedent for an offence
under Section 420 IPC. The complaint was found not to
disclose any criminal offence at all.
35. It is well settled that a judgment is a precedent for
the issue of law which is raised and decided. Phrases and
sentences in a judgment are to be understood in the
context of the facts and circumstances of the case and
9 (2004) 13 SCC 437
10 (1992) 4 SCC 305
11(2015) 8 SCC 29315
the same cannot be read in isolation.
36. As observed above, every breach of contract does
not give rise to an offence of cheating. The language and
tenor of Vesa Holdings (P) Ltd. (supra), particularly,
the observation that breach of contract would give rise to
an offence of cheating only in those cases where there
was any deception played at the very inception, is to be
understood in the context of the facts of that case and
accordingly construed. The phrase “in those cases where
there was any deception played at the very inception”
cannot be read out of context. This is not a case of
breach of contract simplicitor but there are serious
allegations of forgery of documents, use of blank letter-
head, papers and cheque leaves of the appellant.
37. In this case, it cannot be said that there were no
allegations which prima facie constitute ingredients of
offences under Sections 420, 409 and 34 of the Indian
Penal Code in complaint. There were clear allegations of
fraud and cheating which prima facie constitute offences
under Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code. The
correctness of the allegations can be adjudged only at the
trial when evidence is adduced. At this stage, it was not16
for the High Court to enter into factual arena and decide
whether the allegations were correct or whether the same
were a counter-blast to any proceedings initiated by the
respondents.
38. In Jatinder Singh (supra), this Court clearly held
that if dismissal of the complaint was not on merit, but on
default of the complainant, moving the Magistrate again
with a second complaint on the same facts is
maintainable. But if the dismissal of the complaint under
Section 203 of the Code was on merits, the position could
be different.
39. The failure to mention the first complaint in the
subsequent one is also inconsequential as held, in effect,
in Jatinder Singh (supra). Mentioning of reasons for
withdrawal of an earlier complaint is also not a condition
precedent for maintaining a second complaint. In our
considered opinion, the High Court clearly erred in law in
dismissing the complaint, which certainly disclosed an
offence prima facie. At the cost of repetition, it is
reiterated that it was not for the High Court to enter the
factual arena and adjudicate the merits of the allegations.17
40. The appeal is, therefore, allowed and the impugned
order of the High Court quashing the complaint is set
aside. The first respondent shall proceed with further
investigation in accordance with law.
.................................J.
(R. BANUMATHI)
.................................J.
(INDIRA BANERJEE)
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER 14, 2018