IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 535 OF 2004
STATE OF U.P. ..... APPELLANT
VERSUS
RAM PRASAD AND ORS. ..... RESPONDENTS
O R D E R
It is true that the judgment of the High Court
is rather sketchy and does not really take into account
the entire evidence adduced by the parties. It is
equally true that the High Court has found that
something untoward had happened as the conviction of
the respondent under Section 376 of the Indian Penal
Code has been converted into one of Section 354 of the
IPC. The implication of the above finding is that the
High Court has confirmed the presence of the respondent
at the time of the incident. It also appears that the
respondents were satisfied with the judgment of the
High Court as they have filed no appeal in this Court
against that judgment. We have nevertheless gone
through the judgment of the trial court as well as theHigh Court and find that the evidence of rape is not
clear or explicit.
Mr. Pramod Swarup, the learned senior counsel
for the appellant-State has vehemently argued that
there was no reason as to why the prosecutrix, a young
girl raped by four young men, should involve them in a
false case and weightage must to be given to her
testimony over any other evidence. It is true that her
evidence calls for the deepest consideration but at the
same time to ignore the other prosecution evidence
would be a very dangerous doctrine to project. In the
present matter, we see that the doctor deposed that
there was no definite opinion that the prosecutrix had
been raped as she was used to sexual intercourse and
that no external or internal injuries had been seen in
her private parts. Moreover, the vaginal swabs and
stains on the petticoat which were sent to the
laboratory has borne no result as, the prosecution has
not produced on record the report of the laboratory.
The inference that is to be drawn is that the Chemical
Examiner's Report did not support the prosecution
story. There is yet another circumstance which must be
found in favour of the respondents. The prosecutrix
deposed that she had sustained injuries on her wrists
when her glass bangles had broken during the commissionof the rape. The doctor, however, found that there was
no injuries on her person. We are, therefore, of the
opinion that no interference is called for in this
appeal, which is, accordingly, dismissed.
..................J
[HARJIT SINGH BEDI]
..................J
[AFTAB ALAM]
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 26, 2009.