http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 1
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 1284 of 2002
PETITIONER:
SATISH SHARMA AND ANR.
RESPONDENT:
STATE OF GUJARAT
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 05/12/2002
BENCH:
S. RAJENDRA BABU & P. VENKATARAMA REDDI
JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
2002 Supp(4) SCR 635
The following Order of the Court was delivered : Leave granted.
While considering an application for grant of bail to accused in a criminal
case, the High Court made certain observations in the order under appeal
against the appellants that they have tried to over reach the process of
law by submitting a report under Section 169 Cr.P.C. before the Court of
Metropolitan Magistrate to discharge all the three accused for serious
offences arising under Section 114, 302 IPC and under Section 25 (1)(c) of
the Arms Act. The High Court observed that by filing the cancellation
report the appellants had shown scant regard to the proceedings before the
Sessions Court and the High Court, as on two occasions the petitions for
anticipatory bail were rejected; that, the appellants have not applied
their mind in filing such a report under Section 169 Cr.P.C. and have tried
to interfere with the administration of justice amounting to serious
misconduct: that, the State Government should take serious action,
including suspension from service of both the appellants.
If at the stage of grant or refusal of anticipatory bail certain aspects of
the case are considered but later if the investigating agency files a
report under Section 169 Cr.P.C., it is difficult to perceive that such a
step would amount to interference with the administration of justice.
We have carefully gone through the observations made by the learned Judge
of the High Court and we are of the opinion that those observations are
neither justified nor called for in the case. Therefore, we direct that the
observations made in the order of the High Court from paragraph 16 till the
end of the order, except the operative part thereof, shall stand expunged.
The appeal is allowed accordingly.