http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 3
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 827-829 of 2000
PETITIONER:
JHAPSA KABARI & ORS.
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 04/12/2001
BENCH:
U.C. Banerjee & Y.K. Sabharwal
JUDGMENT:
[With Criminal Appeal No.873 of 2000]
J U D G M E N T
Y.K. Sabharwal, J.
This case relates to murder of three persons in a faction ridden village which had s
een several murders. On the date of occurrence at about 10 a.m. there was murder of Naseeb
Kabari. According to the case of the prosecution, the accused persons were part of an unla
wful assembly of about 50 persons and were armed with deadly weapons like gun, bhala, farsa
and garasa. In prosecution of their common object, they caused death of Shital Singh and Ra
m Sewak Singh, who along with one Khattar Singh was believed by the unlawful assembly to be
responsible for murder of Naseem Kabari.
Ram Sewak Singh and Shital Singh are cousin brothers. According to the prosecution, they we
re both assaulted by means of farsa by accused Bhikhar Raut. Accused Deep Narayan Singh cut
the neck of Ram Sewak Singh while accused Israil Kabari assaulted with the bhala on the abd
omen of Shital Singh. Both died instantaneously. Thereafter the unlawful assembly went to
the house of Khattar Singh and, according to the prosecution, accused Tarni Prasad Singh, Bh
ikhar Raut and Tahir Kabari snatched his son Santosh Kumar Singh aged about three years from
the lap of the wife of Khattar Singh. He was taken away and on the next day, Santosh Kumar
Singh was found murdered and his dead body was found buried in a paddy field from where it
was recovered by the Investigating Officer.
Seventeen persons were placed on trial having been charged under Sections 302/34 and
148 of the Indian Penal Code (‘IPC’ for short) for intentionally and knowingly causing the
death of Ram Sewak Singh, Shital Singh and Santosh Kumar Singh in furtherance of their commo
n intention. They were also further charged under Sections 449 and 380 IPC. Accused Israil
Kabari was separately charged under Section 302 IPC simpliciter for murder of Shital Singh.
Deepan Singh @ Deep Narayan Singh was also separately charged for murder of Ram Sewak Sing
h. Bhikhar Raut, Tahir Kabari and Tarni Prasad Singh were also charged under Section 302/34
IPC for murder of Santosh Kumar Singh.
Out of 17 accused, two, namely, Jahuri Raut and Hakim Kabari were acquitted by the Sessions
Court. Deepan Singh @ Deep Narayan Singh died when the appeal was pending in the High Court
and so also the accused Nirsu Narayan Singh. Bhulla Bind did not challenge conviction and
sentence imposed on him by the Sessions Court. The plea of alibi of accused Mod Narayan Sin
gh was accepted by the High Court resulting in his acquittal. The remaining accused are app
ellants in these appeals.
Except the two accused, who were acquitted, the rest were convicted for offence unde
r Section 302/34 IPC for causing death of Ram Sewak Singh and Shital Singh. Bhikhar Rau
t, Tahir Kabari and Tarni Prasad Singh were also convicted for offence under Section 364 IPC
. They were, however, not found guilty of offence under Section 302/34 IPC for the murder o
f the child Santosh Kumar Singh on the finding that nobody has actually seen them committinghttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 3
his murder. As already stated, dead body of Santosh Kumar Singh was found in a paddy field
on the next day. The Sessions Court found that the child had been kidnapped from the lap of
his mother for which these three were found guilty. All, except those who were acquitted,
were also convicted for offence under Sections 148 and 149 IPC. All the accused persons wer
e acquitted of the charge under Section 380 IPC. Those found guilty of offence under Sectio
n 302/34 IPC were directed to undergo imprisonment for life and rigorous imprisonment for th
ree years for offence under Section 148 IPC and 10 years for offence under Section 449 IPC.
Bhikhar Raut, Tahir Kabari and Tarni Prasad Singh were also sentenced to undergo rigorous i
mprisonment for 10 years for offence under Section 364 IPC.
The Sessions Court based the conviction mainly on the evidence of PW-1 and PW-8. PW
-1, Deopari Devi is widow of Ram Sewak Singh and PW-8, Ramadhar Singh who was aged about 14
years at the time of occurrence is son of Shital Singh. PW-2 is the mother of Santosh Kumar
Singh from whose lap, the three accused took away the child. The Sessions Court based the
conviction for offence under Section 364 mainly upon the testimony of PW-2 Pawan Devi, PW-4
Nandini Devi and PW-5 Ramashish Singh.
The High Court has confirmed the conviction and sentence awarded by the Sessions cou
rt except that of Mod Narayan Singh, as already stated. The judgment of the High Court is b
ased primarily on the testimony of PW-1 insofar as the conviction of the accused for the mur
der of Ram Sewak Singh and Shital Singh is concerned. In respect of PW-8, the High Court ex
pressed doubts about his presence in the house on the ground that he being a school student
and it having not been proved that he was not in school and also that PW-1 had not deposed a
bout his presence and he did not mention the name of PW-1 in his fardbayan. The conviction
for offence under Section 364 IPC was confirmed as a result of the acceptance of the testimo
ny of the mother of the child and also other witnesses as noticed hereinbefore.
Learned counsel for the appellants contends that there is no evidence whatsoever for convict
ion of the appellants and the High Court having found the presence of PW-8 doubtful ought to
have acquitted all the appellants instead of confirming their conviction on the solitary st
atement of PW-1.
PW-1 is widow of the deceased Ram Sewak Singh. She has given graphic account of the
occurrence. Ram Sewak Singh and Shital Singh had common courtyard. She was cooking food i
n her kitchen at about 11 a.m. when the incident happened. She saw them going to the courty
ard of Sarjug Singh which was contiguous. She gave detailed account of how Israil Kabari pi
erced bhala in the abdomen of Shital Singh and how Bhikhar Raut assaulted both of them with
farsa and how Deepan Singh @ Deep Narayan Singh had cut the neck of her husband. Deepan Si
ngh is already dead. She is a natural, trustworthy, reliable and competent witness. She sa
w the occurrence. Her deposition is consistent with the course of events and conduct natura
l with that of a wife. It is true that if the presence of PW-8 is doubtful, it becomes a ca
se of conviction based on the testimony of a solitary witness. There is, however, no bar in
basing conviction on the testimony of solitary witness so long as the said witness is relia
ble and trustworthy. The Sessions Court and the High Court examined the testimony of PW-1 a
nd found no reason to disbelieve it. We have also gone through the testimony of PW-1. We ar
e also of the view that her deposition is most natural, reliable and trustworthy. She could
not be shaken in the cross-examination. Simply because 14 years’ old boy did not name her
in the fardbayan, in the facts of the case, is of no consequence and does not require her ev
idence to be rejected. He must have been under a mental tension on account of the murder of
his father and uncle. In our view, there is no infirmity in the conviction and sentence of
Bhikhar Raut and Israil Kabari for offence under Section 302/34 IPC.
Insofar as other appellants are concerned, the finding of the High Court is that the
re is no specific allegations against them. There is no evidence whatsoever to establis
h that any criminal act was done by them in furtherance of a common intention. As above not
iced, there were about 50 persons. Nothing was shown before the Sessions Court or the High
Court or even before us to establish common intention of the remaining accused. The common
intention is different than the common object. The charge against them is not under Section
149 IPC. Even otherwise, it was not shown that the ingredients of Section 149 had been est
ablished. There is total absence of evidence both in respect of Section 34 as well as Secti
on 149 IPC. Therefore, it is not possible to confirm the conviction of the appellants o
ther than Bhikhar Raut and Israil Kabari.
With regard to the incident of kidnapping of Santosh Kumar Singh, we find that on ap
preciation of evidence, the three persons abovenamed were rightly convicted under Section 36
4 IPC. Their conviction was rightly maintained by the High Court. It is based on the testi
mony of the mother of Santosh Kumar Singh from whose lap the child was kidnapped and also th
e testimony of other witnesses (PWs-4 and 5). We find no merit in the contention that three
persons could not have been convicted for kidnapping of a three year old child. Bhikhar Ra
ut, Tahir Kabari and Tarni Prasad Singh have been rightly convicted and sentenced for offenc
e under Section 364 IPC.http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 3
For the foregoing reasons, we partly allow the appeals and set aside the conviction of the a
ppellants other than Bhikhar Raut and Israil Kabari for offence under Section 302/34 IPC. T
he appeals of Bhikhar Raut and Israil Kabari are, however, dismissed. The conviction of Bhi
khar Raut, Tahir Kabari and Tarni Prasad Singh under Section 364 IPC is maintained and their
appeals challenging that conviction are dismissed. All the appeals stand disposed of in th
e above terms.
.........................J.
[U.C. Banerjee]
...........................J.
[Y.K. Sabharwal]
December 4, 2001