Crl.A. No. 817 of 2007
1
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 817 of 2007
RAM DAS ..... APPELLANT
VERSUS
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH ..... RESPONDENT
O R D E R
1. At about 8:30a.m. on 19th July, 1990 Raju PW-1 and
his father Nand Ram hereinafter referred to as 'the
deceased' were in their field guarding their crop, when
the appellant Ram Das arrived at that place carrying an
axe. He quarreled with the deceased asking him as to
why he had dismantled a part of the mound in his field.
This led to an altercation between them whereupon the
appellant picked up a stone from his field and hit the
deceased on his chest and when he fell down caused him
7/8 injuries with the axe which he was already carrying.
On the cries raised by Raju, PW-1, Ratanlal and Tansi
Pws- 2 and 3 also arrived at the spot whereafter the
appellant ran away towards the village. The trial court
on an examination of the evidence of Pws – 1, 2 and 3
observed that the evidence could not be believed asCrl.A. No. 817 of 2007
2
there were discrepancies inter se the witnesses. It
also held that their evidence was not supported by the
medical testimony inasmuch as there were only four
injuries on the dead body whereas the witneses had
stated them to be between 7 and 15 injuries. The trial
court, accordingly, acquitted the accused. An appeal
was thereafter taken by the State of Madhya Pradesh to
the High Court and the High Court relying on the Pws –
1, 2 and 3 as also the medical evidence and finding that
the judgment of the trial court was perverse and not
possible on the evidence that had come before it, has
reversed the judgment of the trial court insofar as the
conviction was concerned but holding that there was no
intention on the part of the appellant to cause death,
as there was no pre-meditation and that it had happened
in the course of a sudden quarrel, convicted him under
Section 304 Part 2 of the IPC and sentenced him to 8
years rigorous imprisonment. This appeal by way of
special leave is before us by the accused Ram Das.
2. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties
and gone through the evidence very carefully. We find
absolutely no reason to doubt the evidence of Pws – 1, 2
and 3. PW -1 Raju was about 10/12 years old and was
also the author of the First Information Report. TheCrl.A. No. 817 of 2007
3
trial court had put certain questions to him during the
course of his examination in chief which he had answered
very lucidly and logically. We also see that he cannot
be said to be so young that he would not be able to
understand as to what could had happened in his
presence. Likewise, we find that the evidence of P.Ws. 2
and 3, Ratanlal and Tansi, whose fields were adjoining
those of the deceased have fully supported the
prosecution story. Nothing has been brought out on
record as to why these two witnesses would tell a lie
about a person for whom they did not have any ill-will.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the conviction of
the appellant was fully justified. We are indeed
surprised as to how in the facts of the case this
matter would fall under Section 304 Part 2 of the IPC,
as the medical evidence shows five injuries on the
person of the deceased, all on the head and with all the
bones of the head being fractures which could have been
caused with an axe. We are, however, unable to do
anything in the matter as the State has not chosen to
file an appeal against the judgment of the High Court,
on this score. The appeal is dismissed.
..............................J
[HARJIT SINGH BEDI]Crl.A. No. 817 of 2007
4
..............................J
[CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]
NEW DELHI
APRIL 05, 2011.