http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 8
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 887 of 1997
Special Leave Petition (crl.) 47-49 of 1998
PETITIONER:
James Martin
RESPONDENT:
State of Kerala
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 16/12/2003
BENCH:
DORAISWAMY RAJU & ARIJIT PASAYAT
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
Self-preservation is the prime instinct of every human being. The
right of private defence is a recognized right in the criminal law.
Therefore, Section 96 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short ’the IPC’)
provides that nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the
right of private defence. The question is, as happens in many cases,
where exercise of such rights is claimed, whether the "Lakshman Rekha",
applicable to its exercise has been exceeded. Section 99 IPC delineates
the extent to which the right may be exercised.
The claim was made by the accused in the following background:
Appellant-James Martin faced trial along with his father\026Xavier
for alleged commission of offences punishable under Sections 302, 307,
326 read with Section 34 and Section 326 read with Section 114 IPC and
Sections 25(B)(1) of the of the Arms Act, 1959 (in short ’the Act’) and
Sections 27 and 30 thereof. Learned Sessions Judge, N. Paravur, found
the present appellant (A-1) guilty of offences punishable under Section
304 Part I, 326 and 324 IPC, while the other accused was found guilty of
the offences punishable under Section 304 Part I read with Section 34,
302 read with Sections 24, 324 IPC. Both the accused persons were
sentenced to undergo imprisonment for 7 years and for the second
offence, 2 years RI and fine of Rs.20,000/- with default stipulation of
1 year sentence. It was directed that in case fine was realized it was
to be paid to (PW-3). Each of the accused was also to undergo sentence
RI for 1 year for the offence punishable under Section 324 IPC and to
pay a fine of Rs.5,000/- with default stipulation of 6 months sentence.
The fine, if any on realisation, was directed to be paid to PW-7 and PW-
8. The fine was directed to be paid to (PW-8). The sentences were
directed to run concurrently.
A-2 also filed a complaint against 24 persons, which was tried as
S.C. no.74 of 1991. In the said case some of the PWs and their
supporters were the accused. State had launched prosecution against 12
of the said 24 persons. The same as tried as S.C. no. 57 of 1990.
Several appeals and revisions were filed by the appellants, the
prosecution witnesses and the State. Appeal filed by the accused
persons was numbered as criminal appeal no.4 of 1994. As complaint was
lodged by the accused alleging various offences by the prosecution
witnesses, a separate case (S.C. 74 of 1991) was registered in which
there was an acquittal. Against such acquittal also appeal was filed by
A-2 which was numbered as criminal appeal no. 471 of 1994. Criminalhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 8
appeal no. 784 of 1994 was filed by the State questioning acquittal in
S.C. 57 of 1990. Father of one of the victims filed Crl. Revision Cr.RP
820 of 1994. The propriety of conviction under Section 304 Part I
instead of Section 302 IPC was questioned by the State in Crl. Appeal
no. 312 of 1994. By a common judgment all matters were disposed of.
The matrix of the litigation related to a Bharat Bandh on
15.3.1998 sponsored by some political parties. Prosecution version as
unfolded during trial is as follows:
Most of the shops and offices were closed and vehicles were off
the road. There were isolated instances of defiance to the bundh call
and some incidents had taken place that, however, did not escalate to
uncontrolled dimensions. Cheranelloor, where the concerned incidents
took place, is a politically sensitive suburb of Kochi where accused-
appellant James and his father Xavier had their residence, besides a
bread factory and a flour mill in the same compound. It was not
anybody’s case that they belonged to any political party or had
credentials, which were unwholesome. By normal reckoning, their
business activities flourished well. They owned a tempo van and other
vehicles which were parked inside the compound itself. It was, however,
said that their success in business was a matter of envy for Thomas
Francis, their neighbour, particularly who filed complaints to the local
authorities against the conduct of the mill and the factory and also
filed a writ petition to get them closed down, but without success. He
was one of the accused in S.C.No.74 of 1991 and according to the accused
appellant-James was the kingpin and that the incident was wrought by him
out of hatred and deep animosity towards James and Xavier.
The incident involved in this case took place at about 2.30 p.m.
on 15.3.1988 when five young men, the two deceased in this case, namely,
Mohan and Basheer (hereinafter referred to as ’deceased’ by their
respective name), and PW-1, PW-2 and PW-4, who were activists of the
bundh, as followers of the political parties which organized that bundh
on that day, got into the flour mill of the A-2 through the unlocked
gate leading access to that mill situate in a property comprising the
residential building, a bread factory and other structures belonging to
that accused. This group of five men on passing beside the mill of A-2
while they were perambulating the streets of Cheranelloor to have a
first hand information as to the observance of the bundh on coming to
know of the operation of the flour mill by A-2 proceeded to that place
and made demands to PW-15, the employee of A-2 who was operating the
mill to close down. An altercation took place between them and on
hearing the commotion the accused, A-1 and A-2 who were inside their
residential building, situate to the west of that mill, rushed to the
place and directed the bundh activists to go out of the mill. As the
activists of the bundh persisted in their demands for closing the mill,
according to the prosecution, A-2 got out of the mill and on the
instruction given by A-2, A-1 locked the gate of the compound from
inside. Then both of them rushed back to the house with A-2 directing
A-1 to take out the gun and shoot down the bundh activists by declaring
that all of them should be finished off. On getting into the house and
after closing the outer door of that building, both the accused rushed
to the southern room of that building which faced the gate with a window
opening to that side. The 1st accused on the instigation of the 2nd
accused, his father, and having that accused beside him, fired at the
bundh activists, who by that time had approached near the locked gate,
by using an S.B.B.L. Gun through the window. The first shot fired from
the gun hit against one of the bundh activists, who had got into the
compound, namely Basheer, and he fell down beside the gate. The other
four bundh activists on requesting the 1st accused not to open fire
rushed towards Basheer and, according to the prosecution, the first
accused fired again with the gun indiscriminately causing injuries to
all of them. Even when the first shot was fired from the gun passersby
in the road situate in front of that property also sustained injuries.http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 8
When the firing continued as stated above some of the residents of the
area who were standing beside the road also received gun shot injuries.
On hearing the gun shots people of the locality rushed to the scene of
occurrence and some of them by scaling over the locked gate broke opened
the lock and removed the injured to the road, from where they were
rushed to the hospital in a tempo van along with the other injured who
had also sustained gun shot injuries while they were standing beside the
road. One among the injured, namely, Mohanan breathed his last while he
was transported in the tempo to the hospital and another, namely,
Basheer, succumbed to his injuries after being admitted at City
Hospital, Ernakulam. All the other injured were admitted in that
hospital to provide them treatment for the injuries sustained. After the
removal of the injured to the hospital in the tempo as aforesaid a
violent mob which collected at the scene of occurrence set fire to the
residential building, flour mill, bread factory, household articles,
cycles, a tempo and scooter, parked in front of the residential building
of the accused, infuriated by the heinous act of the accused in firing
at the bundh activists and other innocent people as aforesaid. Soon
after the firing both the accused and PW-15 escaped from the scene of
occurrence and took shelter in a nearby house.
The information as to the occurrence of a skirmish and altercation
between bundh activists and the accused and of an incident involving
firing at Cheranelloor was received by the police at Kalamassery Police
Station from the Fire Station at Gandhi Nagar, Ernakulam, which was
informed of such an incident over phone by a resident living close to
the place of occurrence.
The accused on the other hand, took the stand that the firing
resulting in the death of two bundh activists and sustaining of grievous
injuries to several others occurred when their house and other
buildings, situated in a common compound bounded with well protected
boundary walls, and movable properties kept therein were set on fire by
an angry mob of bundh activists when the accused failed to heed their
unlawful demand to close down the flour mill which was operated on that
day.
The trial Court discarded the prosecution version that the
deceased and PWs who had sustained injuries had gone through the gate as
claimed. On analysing the evidence it was concluded that they had
scaled the walls. Their entry into premises of the accused was not
lawful. It was also held that PW-15 was roughed up by the bandh
activists, making him runaway. A significant conclusion was arrived at
that they were prepared and in fact used muscle power to achieve their
ends in making the bandh a success. It was categorically held that the
bandh activists on getting into the mill threatened, intimidated and
assaulted PW-15 so as to compel him to close downs the mill. He
sustained injuries, and bandh activists indulged in violence before the
firing took place at the place of occurrence. Accused asked PW-1, PW-2
and PW-4 to leave the place. It was noticed by the trial Court that the
activists were in a foul and violent mood and had beaten up one Jossy,
and this indicated their aggressive mood. They were armed with sharp
edged weapons. Finally, it was concluded that the right of private
defence was exceeded in its exercise.
On consideration of the evidence on record as noted above, the
conviction was made by the trial Court and sentence was imposed. The
trial Court came to hold that though the accused persons claimed alleged
exercise of right of private defence same was exceeded. The view was
endorsed by the High Court by the impugned judgment so far as the
present appellant is concerned. But benefit of doubt was given to A-2,
father of the present appellant.
Mr. Sushil Kumar, learned senior counsel for the appellant
submitted that the factual scenario clearly shows as to how thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 8
appellant was faced with the violent acts of the prosecution witnesses.
Admittedly, all of them had forcibly entered into the premises of the
appellant. PW-15 one of employees was inflicted severe injuries. In
this background, the accused acted in exercise of right of private
defence and there was no question of exceeding such right, as held by
the trial Court and the High Court.
In response, learned counsel for the State submitted that after
analyzing the factual position the trial Court and the High Court have
rightly held that the accused exceeded the right of private defence and
when two persons have lost lives, it cannot be said that the act done by
the accused was within the permissible limits. He also pressed for
accepting prayer in the connected SLPs relating to acquittal of A-2 and
conviction of the accused-appellant under Section 304 Part I.
Only question which needs to be considered, is the alleged
exercise of right of private defence. Section 96, IPC provides that
nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the right of
private defence. The Section does not define the expression ’right of
private defence’. It merely indicates that nothing is an offence which
is done in the exercise of such right. Whether in a particular set of
circumstances, a person legitimately acted in the exercise of the right
of private defence is a question of fact to be determined on the facts
and circumstances of each case. No test in the abstract for determining
such a question can be laid down. In determining this question of fact,
the Court must consider all the surrounding circumstances. It is not
necessary for the accused to plead in so many words that he acted in
self-defence. If the circumstances show that the right of private
defence was legitimately exercised, it is open to the Court to consider
such a plea. In a given case the Court can consider it even if the
accused has not taken it, if the same is available to be considered from
the material on record. Under Section 105 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 (in short ’the Evidence Act’), the burden of proof is on the
accused, who sets up the plea of self-defence, and, in the absence of
proof, it is not possible for the Court to presume the truth of the plea
of self-defence. The Court shall presume the absence of such
circumstances. It is for the accused to place necessary material on
record either by himself adducing positive evidence or by eliciting
necessary facts from the witnesses examined for the prosecution. An
accused taking the plea of the right of private defence is not
necessarily required to call evidence; he can establish his plea by
reference to circumstances transpiring from the prosecution evidence
itself. The question in such a case would be a question of assessing
the true effect of the prosecution evidence, and not a question of the
accused discharging any burden. Where the right of private defence is
pleaded, the defence must be a reasonable and probable version
satisfying the Court that the harm caused by the accused was necessary
for either warding off the attack or for forestalling the further
reasonable apprehension from the side of the accused. The burden of
establishing the plea of self-defence is on the accused and the burden
stands discharged by showing preponderance of probabilities in favour of
that plea on the basis of the material on record. (See Munshi Ram and
Ors. v. Delhi Administration (AIR 1968 SC 702), State of Gujarat v. Bai
Fatima (AIR 1975 SC 1478), State of U.P. v. Mohd. Musheer Khan (AIR 1977
SC 2226), and Mohinder Pal Jolly v. State of Punjab (AIR 1979 SC 577).
Sections 100 to 101 define the extent of the right of private defence of
body. If a person has a right of private defence of body under Section
97, that right extends under Section 100 to causing death if there is
reasonable apprehension that death or grievous hurt would be the
consequence of the assault. The oft quoted observation of this Court in
Salim Zia v. State of U.P. (AIR 1979 SC 391), runs as follows:
"It is true that the burden on an accused
person to establish the plea of self-defence is not
as onerous as the one which lies on the prosecutionhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 8
and that, while the prosecution is required to prove
its case beyond reasonable doubt, the accused need
not establish the plea to the hilt and may discharge
his onus by establishing a mere preponderance of
probabilities either by laying basis for that plea in
the cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses or
by adducing defence evidence."
The accused need not prove the existence of the right of private defence
beyond reasonable doubt. It is enough for him to show as in a civil
case that the preponderance of probabilities is in favour of his plea.
The number of injuries is not always a safe criterion for
determining who the aggressor was. It cannot be stated as a universal
rule that whenever the injuries are on the body of the accused persons,
a presumption must necessarily be raised that the accused persons had
caused injuries in exercise of the right of private defence. The defence
has to further establish that the injuries so caused on the accused
probabilise the version of the right of private defence. Non-
explanation of the injuries sustained by the accused at about the time
of occurrence or in the course of altercation is a very important
circumstance. But mere non-explanation of the injuries by the
prosecution may not affect the prosecution case in all cases. This
principle applies to cases where the injuries sustained by the accused
are minor and superficial or where the evidence is so clear and cogent,
so independent and disinterested, so probable, consistent and credit-
worthy, that it far outweighs the effect of the omission on the part of
the prosecution to explain the injuries. [See Lakshmi Singh v. State of
Bihar (AIR 1976 SC 2263)]. A plea of right of private defence cannot be
based on surmises and speculation. While considering whether the right
of private defence is available to an accused, it is not relevant
whether he may have a chance to inflict severe and mortal injury on the
aggressor. In order to find whether the right of private defence is
available to an accused, the entire incident must be examined with care
and viewed in its proper setting. Section 97 deals with the subject
matter of right of private defence. The plea of right comprises the body
or property (i) of the person exercising the right; or (ii) of any other
person; and the right may be exercised in the case of any offence
against the body, and in the case of offences of theft, robbery,
mischief or criminal trespass, and attempts at such offences in relation
to property. Section 99 lays down the limits of the right of private
defence. Sections 96 and 98 give a right of private defence against
certain offences and acts. The right given under Sections 96 to 98 and
100 to 106 is controlled by Section 99. To claim a right of private
defence extending to voluntary causing of death, the accused must show
that there were circumstances giving rise to reasonable grounds for
apprehending that either death or grievous hurt would be caused to him.
The burden is on the accused to show that he had a right of private
defence which extended to causing of death. Sections 100 and 101, IPC
define the limit and extent of right of private defence.
Sections 102 and 105, IPC deal with commencement and continuance
of the right of private defence of body and property respectively. The
right commences, as soon as a reasonable apprehension of danger to the
body arises from an attempt, or threat, or commit the offence, although
the offence may not have been committed but not until there is that
reasonable apprehension. The right lasts so long as the reasonable
apprehension of the danger to the body continues. In Jai Dev. v. State
of Punjab (AIR 1963 SC 612), it was observed that as soon as the cause
for reasonable apprehension disappears and the threat has either been
destroyed or has been put to route, there can be no occasion to exercise
the right of private defence.
In order to find whether right of private defence is available orhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 6 of 8
not, the injuries received by the accused, the imminence of threat to
his safety, the injuries caused by the accused and the circumstances
whether the accused had time to have recourse to public authorities are
all relevant factors to be considered. Similar view was expressed by
this Court in Biran Singh v. State of Bihar (AIR 1975 SC 87). (See:
Wassan Singh v. State of Punjab (1996) 1 SCC 458, Sekar alias Raja
Sekharan v. State represented by Inspector of Police, T.N. (2002 (8) SCC
354).
As noted in Butta Singh v. The State of Punjab (AIR 1991 SC 1316),
a person who is apprehending death or bodily injury cannot weigh in
golden scales in the spur of moment and in the heat of circumstances,
the number of injuries required to disarm the assailants who were armed
with weapons. In moments of excitement and disturbed mental equilibrium
it is often difficult to expect the parties to preserve composure and
use exactly only so much force in retaliation commensurate with the
danger apprehended to him where assault is imminent by use of force, it
would be lawful to repel the force in self-defence and the right of
private-defence commences, as soon as the threat becomes so imminent.
Such situations have to be pragmatically viewed and not with high-
powered spectacles or microscopes to detect slight or even marginal
overstepping. Due weightage has to be given to, and hyper technical
approach has to be avoided in considering what happens on the spur of
the moment on the spot and keeping in view normal human reaction and
conduct, where self-preservation is the paramount consideration. But,
if the fact situation shows that in the guise of self-preservation, what
really has been done is to assault the original aggressor, even after
the cause of reasonable apprehension has disappeared, the plea of right
of private-defence can legitimately be negatived. The Court dealing
with the plea has to weigh the material to conclude whether the plea is
acceptable. It is essentially, as noted above, a finding of fact.
The right of self-defence is a very valuable right, serving a
social purpose and should not be construed narrowly. (See Vidhya Singh
v. State of M.P. (AIR 1971 SC 1857). Situations have to be judged from
the subjective point of view of the accused concerned in the surrounding
excitement and confusion of the moment, confronted with a situation of
peril and not by any microscopic and pedantic scrutiny. In adjudging the
question as to whether more force than was necessary was used in the
prevailing circumstances on the spot it would be inappropriate, as held
by this Court, to adopt tests by detached objectivity which would be so
natural in a Court room, or that which would seem absolutely necessary
to a perfectly cool bystander. The person facing a reasonable
apprehension of threat to himself cannot be expected to modulate his
defence step by step with any arithmetical exactitude of only that much
which is required in the thinking of a man in ordinary times or under
normal circumstances.
In the illuminating words of Russel (Russel on Crime, 11th Edition
Volume I at page 49):
"....a man is justified in resisting by force anyone
who manifestly intends and endeavours by violence or
surprise to commit a known felony against either his
person, habitation or property. In these cases, he is
not obliged to retreat, and may not merely resist the
attack where he stands but may indeed pursue his
adversary until the danger is ended and if in a
conflict between them he happens to kill his
attacker, such killing is justifiable."
The right of private defence is essentially a defensive right
circumscribed by the governing statute i.e. the IPC, available only whenhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 7 of 8
the circumstances clearly justify it. It should not be allowed to be
pleaded or availed as a pretext for a vindictive, aggressive or
retributive purpose of offence. It is a right of defense, not of
retribution, expected to repel unlawful aggression and not as
retaliatory measure. While providing for exercise of the right, care
has been taken in IPC not to provide and has not devised a mechanism
whereby an attack may be a pretence for killing. A right to defend does
not include a right to launch an offensive, particularly when the need
to defend no longer survived.
The background facts as noted by the trial Court and the High
Court clearly show that the threat to life and property of the accused
was not only imminent but did not cease, and it continued unabated. Not
only there were acts of vandalism, but also destruction of property. The
High Court noticed that explosive substances were used to destroy the
properties of the accused, but did not specifically answer the question
as to whether destruction was prior or subsequent to the shooting by the
accused. The High Court did not find the prosecution evidence
sufficient to decide the question. In such an event the evidence of PW-
15 who was also a victim assumes importance. The High Court without
indicating any acceptable reason held on mere assumptions that his
sympathy lies with the accused. The conclusion was unwarranted, because
the testimony was acted upon by the Courts below as a truthful version
of the incident. The trial Court found that an unruly situation
prevailed in the compound of the accused as a result of the violence
perpetrated by the bandh activists who got into the place by scaling
over the locked gate and that their entry was unlawful too, besides
intimidating and assaulting PW-15 and making him flee without shutting
down the machines. The circumstances were also found to have
necessitated a right of private defence. Even the High Court, candidly
found that tense situation was caused by the deceased and his friends,
that PW-15 suffered violence and obviously there was the threat of more
violence to the person and properties, that the events taking place
generated a sort of frenzy and excitement rendering the situation
explosive and beyond compromise. Despite all these to expect the accused
to remain calm or to observe greater restraint in the teeth of the
further facts found that the accused had only PW-15 who was already
manhandled though they were outnumbered by their opponents (the bandh
activists) and whose attitude was anything but peaceful \026 would be not
only too much to be desired but being unreasonably harsh and
uncharitable, merely carried away only by considerations of sympathy for
the lives lost, on taking a final account of what happened ultimately
after everything was over. In the circumstances, the inevitable
conclusion is that the acts done by the accused were in the reasonable
limits of exercise of his right of private defence and he was entitled
to the protection afforded in law under Section 96 IPC.
Accordingly we set aside the conviction and sentence imposed. The
appeal is allowed. The bail bonds shall stand discharged so far as the
present accused is concerned.
In view of the order passed in criminal appeal no. 887 of 1997,
and conclusions arrived at therein no further orders are necessary to be
passed in SLP (Criminal) Nos. 47-49 of 1998 filed by the State of
Kerala.
Before we part with the case it needs to be noted that in the name
of Hartal or Bandh or strike no person has any right to cause
inconvenience to any other person or to cause in any manner a threat or
apprehension of risk to life, liberty, property of any citizen or
destruction of life and property, and the least any government or public
property. It is high time that the authorities concerned take serious
note of this requirement while dealing with those who destroy public
property in the name of strike, hartal or bandh. Those who at times mayhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 8 of 8
have even genuine demands to make should not loose sight of the overall
situation eluding control and reaching unmanageable bounds endangering
life, liberty and property of citizens and public, enabling anti-social
forces to gain control resulting in all around destruction with counter
productive results at the expense of public order and public peace. No
person has any right to destroy another’s property in the guise of bandh
or hartal or strike, irrespective of the proclaimed reasonableness of
the cause or the question whether there is or was any legal sanction for
the same. The case at hand is one which led to the destruction of
property and loss of lives, because of irresponsible and illegal acts of
some in the name of bandh or hartal or strike. Unless those who organize
can be confident of enforcing effective control over any possible turn
of events, they should think twice to hazard themselves into such risk
prone ventures endangering public peace and public order. The question
whether bandh or hartal or strike has any legal sanctity is of little
consequence in such matters. All the more so when the days are such
where even law-enforcing authorities/those in power also precipitate to
gain political advantage at the risk and cost of their opponents. Unless
such acts are controlled with iron hands, innocent citizens are bound to
suffer and they shall be the victims of the highhanded acts of some
fanatics with queer notions of democracy and freedom of speech or
association. That provides for no license to take law into their own
hands. Any soft or lenient approach for such offenders would be an
affront to rule of law and challenge to public order and peace.