REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1475 OF 2003
BAIJ NATH SAH .. APPELLANT(S)
vs.
STATE OF BIHAR .. RESPONDENT(S)
O R D E R
Four persons in all Parwati Devi, Prabhunath Sah,
Baij Nath Sah, the appellant herein, and one Surajdeo
Misssir were brought to trial for an offence under Sec.366-
A of the Indian Penal Code for having kidnapped Suman
Kumari the minor daughter of Arjun Prasad on 24th June, 1984
from her home. The fourth accused i.e. Surajdeo Missir
died during the course of the trial. The Trial Court by
its judgment dated 5th September, 1991, convicted the
accused for the aforesaid offence and sentenced them to
five years rigorous imprisonment. An appeal was thereafter
taken to the Patna High Court and the learned single Judge
altered the conviction from one under Sec.366-A to Sec.363
of the IPC, released Parvati Devi on the basis of the
sentence already undergone and reduced the sentence of the
appellants Baij Nath Sah and Prabhunath Sah, to one year's
R.I.-2-
A special leave petition was subsequently filed in
this Court by Baij Nath Sah - the appellant and his brother
Prabhunath Sah but as the latter did not surrender to
custody, his special leave petition was dismissed. We are
told that he has undergone the sentence as of now.
This appeal by special leave filed by Baij Nath Sah
is before us.
Mr. Gaurav Aggarwal, the learned counsel for the
appellant has argued that there was no evidence whatsoever
against the appellant herein. He has pointed out that his
name had not figured in the FIR and that the only evidence
used by the Courts below to convict the appellant was the
statement under Sec.164 of the Cr.P.C. made by Suman Kumari
before the Magistrate on the 25th July, 1984. He has
further pointed out that this statement was inadmissible in
evidence but even if taken into account did not involve or
implicate the appellant in any manner.
Mr. Tanmay Mehta, the learned counsel appearing for
the State of Bihar has however supported the judgment of
the Trial Court and has submitted that in addition to the
aforesaid statement the other evidence with regard to the
involvement of the accused was also available on record.-3-
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties
and have gone through the record. We see from the
judgments of the Courts below that the only material that
has been used against the appellant is the statement under
Sec.164 of the Cr.P.C. This Court in Ram Kishan Singh vs.
Harmit Kaur and Another ((1972) 3 SCC 280) has held that a
statement of 164 Cr.P.C. is not substantive evidence and
can be utilized only to corroborate or contradict the
witness vis-a-vis. statement made in Court. In other
words, it can be only utilized only as a previous statement
and nothing more. We see from the record that Suman Kumari
was not produced as a witness as she had since been married
in Nepal and her husband had refused to let her return to
India for the evidence. In this light her statement under
Section 164 cannot be used against the appellant. Even
otherwise, a look at her statement does not involve the
appellant in any manner. The allegation against him is
that after she had been kidnapped by the other accused she
had been brought to their home, where the appellant wasalso present. In other words, when she had been brought to
the appellant's home the kidnapping had already taken
place. The appellant could therefore not be implicated in
the offence under Sec.363 or 366-A of the IPC de hors other
evidence to show his involvement in the events preceding
the kidnapping.
We accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the
judgment impugned. The appellant is acquitted.
-4-
The appellant is on bail. His bail bonds shall stand
discharged.
.................J.
(HARJIT SINGH BEDI)
.................J.
(C.K. PRASAD)
New Delhi,
April 29, 2010.