CRL. A. NO. 972 OF 2007 REPORTABLE
1
PART-II
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 972 OF 2007
SAMEDEEN ..... APPELLANT
VERSUS
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH ..... RESPONDENT
O R D E R
1. This appeal arises out of the following
facts:-
Islaman, the deceased herein, daughter of P.W. 4
– Azeez had been married to Samedeen, appellant,
allegedly in the year 1988. As per the prosecution
story, the accused were not happy with the dowry that
had been given and on several occasions the deceased
had complained to her parents that she was being ill-
treated both verbally and physically. As a consequence
of this ill-treatment, a Panchayat had been called and
the accused had undertaken that they would not harass
her any further. The story, further, goes that despite
the assurances held out by the accused with regard to
their behaviour with the deceased, the ill-treatmentCRL. A. NO. 972 OF 2007 REPORTABLE
2
continued and about ten days before the incident,
Islaman had returned to her parents' home, but on the
intervention of the members of the Panchayat, however,
she had returned to her in-laws' home a few days later.
On 26th September, 1994, Samedeen, the appellant, and
Suleman, his brother came to the house of P.W. 4 -
Azeez and told to him that Islaman was missing. Azeez,
already suspicious about the conduct of the accused,
detained them in his house and informed the Shahur
Police about the fact that his daughter was missing but
no action was taken by the Police on that complaint.
On the contrary, on 27th September, 1994, one Ravindra
Kumar lodged a report with the Adarsh Mandi, Shamli
Police Station through Exhibit Ka.1 that the dead body
of the wife of Samedeen was lying in his sugarcane
field. On receiving this information, a case under
Section 302/201 was registered at the Police Station
against unknown persons. The prosecution story further
goes that dissatisfied with the steps that the police
had taken on the complaint filed by him, Azeez also
made a written complaint to the Superintendent of
Police, Muzaffar Nagar, Exhibit Ka.2 on the 27th
September, 1994, making allegations against Samedeen
and his family. On the completion of the investigation
a charge sheet under Section 304B/34 read with SectionCRL. A. NO. 972 OF 2007 REPORTABLE
3
498A of the IPC was filed against Suleman and Samedeen
aforesaid, a third brother Subedeen and their parents
Jahoor Hasan and Vakeela and the matter was brought to
trial. The Additional Sessions Judge, Muzaffar Nagar,
in the course of his judgment dated 1st March, 2001
held that the date of marriage of Samedeen with Islaman
was uncertain and in this view of the matter, the
question as to whether the death had taken place within
7 years of marriage or that the demand for dowry had
been made soon before death was again not proved on
record. The Court further held that the complaint
Exhibit Ka.2 was an after thought and had obviously
been created to fill up a lacuna in the prosecution
story and the evidence of P.W 4 and P.W. 5, (the latter
being the brother of the deceased) with regard to the
demand for dowry etc. was not worthy of belief. The
Court further opined that the version given by P.W. 4
with regard to the meeting of the Panchayat was again
not proved on record and having held to the above
effect acquitted all the accused. The State of U.P.
thereafter filed an appeal against acquittal before the
Allahabad High Court. The High Court in the course of
its judgment observed that the marriage had taken place
on the 22nd October, 1988 as per the statements of
P.Ws. 4 and 5, and as the death had occurred within 7CRL. A. NO. 972 OF 2007 REPORTABLE
4
years thereafter i.e. on 26th September, 1994 and the
statements of P.Ws. 4 and 5 with regard to the demand
of dowry soon before the death read with the
presumption raised against an accused under Section
113B of the Evidence Act, the case against the husband
i.e present appellant had been proved on record and
having held as above reversed the judgment of the trial
court qua the appellant herein but dismissed the State
appeal with regard to the other four accused. Samedeen
is the solitary appellant before us after special
leave.
2. We have heard the learned counsel for the
parties and gone through the record very carefully.
3. At the very outset, we must emphasise that the
High Court appears to have ignored the basic premise in
law that if the trial court had rendered its judgment
on a proper appreciation of the evidence and that the
findings arrived at were possible thereof and that the
judgment of the trial court could not be said to be
perverse, no interference was called for. A perusal
of the judgment of the trial court reveals that its
judgment cannot by any stretch of imagination be said
to be perverse. The trial court has considered the
various facets of the case which had created a doubt
about the prosecution story inasmuch as that there wasCRL. A. NO. 972 OF 2007 REPORTABLE
5
uncertainity about the date of the marriage, there was
no evidence of a demand for dowry soon before the death
or even long before that date and that the story given
in the ocular evidence by P.W. 4 and P.W. 5 was a
clear after thought as the issue with regard to the
dowry or the ill-treatment meted out to the deceased
had not been referred to by them in their statements
under Section 161 Cr.P.C., even though the statement
of P.W.-5 Mustakeen the deceased's brother had been
recorded about 40 days after the incident. It is also
significant that the High Court has chosen to believe
the prosecution story with regard to only one of the
five accused. From a perusal of the evidence in this
case it is quite clear that there was absolutely no
distinction in the role given to all the five accused
and the allegations made against them were more or less
identical. We are, therefore, unable to understand as
to how the High Court was in a position to appreciate
the evidence in a way whereby the appellant has been
convicted and the appeal of the State dismissed qua
four persons. The reasons given by the High Court that
as the couple i.e. Islaman and Samedeen, were living
together made their case distinct and different vis-à-
vis the other accused must be rejected for the reason
that in a case of demand for dowry, the couple livingCRL. A. NO. 972 OF 2007 REPORTABLE
6
separately would not be the only determining factor and
what is to be seen is the over all nature and quality
of the evidence. As already mentioned above, the
evidence with respect to all the accused is more or
less identical and the High Court was, therefore, not
justified in making a distinction between the two sets
of accused.
4. We have also gone through the merits of the
case on the basis of the arguments advanced by the
learned counsel for the parties. It will be seen that
one of the primary ingredients for conviction under
Section 304B of the IPC is that a demand should be made
soon before the death. No such demand is discernible.
We have also gone through the document Exhibit Ka.2
which is a copy of the complaint allegedly made by P.W.
4 to the Superintendent of Police, Muzaffar Nagar.
This document had been produced before the trial court
for the first time on the date when the evidence was
recorded i.e. in August, 1999, i.e. five years after
the incident. We are unable to appreciate as to how
this document was taken into evidence as it was
secondary evidence and therefore required to be proved
under Section 65 of the Evidence Act. Even otherwise,
the story projected therein appears to be unbelievable
and is clearly contradicted by the statement made byCRL. A. NO. 972 OF 2007 REPORTABLE
7
Azeez _ P.W. 4 in the course of his testimony. It is
indeed very significant that a question was pointedly
put to P.W. 4 in his cross examination whether the
document produced by him had been prepared in the
office of his Advocate a short while earlier. He
persistently refused to answer the question and when
the trial judge examined the document he found that the
ink on the thumb impression was still wet. It is,
therefore, obvious that Exhibit Ka.2 was a document
which had been created on the day when the evidence was
being recorded and the finding of the trial court,
therefore, that it is a forged document, was fully
justified. Furthermore, a perusal of Ex. P2, the FIR
reveals that the incriminating circumstances against
the accused have not been spelt out. For example,
there is no reference to a demand for dowry or to the
fact that there had been ill-treatment of Islaman on
account of the inability of her parents to meet the
dowry demands. The statement of P.W. 5 is equally
ambivalent. Though his statement under Section 161
Cr.P.C. had been recorded 40 days after the incident he
had even then made material improvements in his
statement in Court exactly in the manner as in the case
of P.W. 4 Azeez. We are, therefore, of the opinion
that the trial court was fully justified in observingCRL. A. NO. 972 OF 2007 REPORTABLE
8
that the statements of these witnesses could not be
believed. In the light of the fact that a demand for
dowry has not been proved to be made shortly before the
death which happened on 27th September, 1994, the
presumption under Section 113B of the Evidence Act
which is to be taken against an accused, is not
available to the prosecution.
5. We, accordingly, allow the appeal and order the
acquittal of the appellant. As the appellant is in
jail he is directed to be released forthwith if not
wanted in any other case.
..................J
[HARJIT SINGH BEDI]
..................J
[J.M. PANCHAL]
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER 17, 2009.CRL. A. NO. 972 OF 2007 REPORTABLE
9
PART-I
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 972 OF 2007
SAMEDEEN ..... APPELLANT
VERSUS
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH ..... RESPONDENT
O R D E R
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
Vide our separate reasoned order, we have
allowed the appeal and set aside the conviction of the
appellant and ordered his acquittal.
It is stated by Mr. S.S. Nehra, the learned
counsel for the appellants that the appellant is in
jail. We direct that he be set at liberty forthwith if
not required in connection with any other case.
The reasoned order to follow.
..................J
[HARJIT SINGH BEDI]
..................J
[J.M. PANCHAL]
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER 17, 2009.