IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1934 OF 2009
( @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.)NO.5560/2007)
SHARAD ... APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA ... RESPONDENT(S)
O R D E R
Leave granted.
The appellant herein was tried by the Ist Adhoc Additional
Sessions Judge, Wardha for the offence punishable under Section 302
and was sentenced for undergoing life imprisonment with a fine of
Rs.1,000/- in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one month.
The appellant then filed an appeal before the High Court and the
same was dismissed by the High Court. The appellant preferred this
appeal and at the time of issuing notice we have indicated that the
appeal is only confined to the question of nature of the offence.
Heard both sides.
Learned counsel for the appellant contends that the
appellant was a young man aged about 20 years at the time of the
incident; and there was no pre-mediation or serious intention to
kill the deceased. Appellant had a quarrel with one Mukesh in which
one Manoj Kashyap and one Sanjay Pande intervened and separated them
each other. Thereafter the accused went from the place of incident
and he met Mukesh later and it appears that there was a quarrel
thereafter and the accused caused injury to Mukesh and he died. The
injury was on the left side of the chest near sternum between 3rd and4th rib. There is also another injury which is superficial in nature.
Learned counsel for the appellant contends that there is only one
injury and that too pursuant to the altercation and there is no
evidence to show that there was any previous enmity or not. The
appellant's contention is that the offence committed does not amount
to murder. Going by the injury sustained by the deceased and having
regard to the entire facts and circumstances of the case, in our
opinion, the offence committed by the appellant, at the most, comes
under Part -I of Section 304 I.P.C. We, therefore, set aside the
conviction of the appellant under Section 302 I.P.C. and find him
guilty under Section 304 Part-I of IPC and sentence him to undergo
imprisonment for 10 years. The appellant will undergo the remaining
period of sentence.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
..................CJI
(K.G. BALAKRISHNAN)
...................J.
(TARUN CHATTERJEE)
...................J.
(Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)
NEW DELHI;
23RD OCTOBER, 2009