reason as to why he should not have a license for a gun. A reference was also
made to Clause 7 of Section 17 of the Act which provides that if the conviction is set
aside on appeal or otherwise, the suspension or revocation of the license by the
court convicting the holder of the license shall become void. According to the High
Court, on the same analogy, when the respondent’s involvement was not found
acceptable the licence which was cancelled, ought to have been restored. Learned
counsel for the State submitted before the High Court that the State had already
filed an appeal questioning the acquittal of the respondent. The High Court was of
the view that filing of an appeal cannot have any effect on the judgment of the
acquittal. In case acquittal is set aside it was open to the authorities to take
necessary action.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the fact that appeal was
pending consideration, should have been given due weightage. Even otherwise, a
person serving in the Police Force and charged with serious offences should not
be allowed to have a license. According to him grant of license is discretionary and
there is no right in that sense to have a license. Learned counsel for the respondent,
on the other hand, supported the judgment of the High Court.
We find that while issuing notice this Court had directed stay of the impugned
order by Order 2.12.2002. Subsequently, leave was granted by Order dated
2.5.2003 and the interim order was made absolute. In other words, the High Court’s
Order is not operative as of now.
We are of the considered view that interest of justice would be best served if
the orders passed by this Court staying operation of the High Court’s order are
continued till the disposal of the Appeal by the High Court. We make it clear by
giving this direction, we have not expressed any opinion on the merits of the
case. However, we request the High Court to dispose of the Appeal, if pending, as
early as practicable preferably by the end of year 2008.
The Appeal is accordingly disposed of.