http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 5
PETITIONER:
SHIVSAGAR TIWARI
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 11/10/1996
BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH, B.L. HANSARIA
ACT:
HEADNOTE:
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
HANSARIA.J.
Edmund Burke stated as early as 1777: "Among a people
generally corrupt, liberty cannot long exist." In 1778, he
observed: "An arbitrary system indeed must always be a
corrupt one. There never was a man who thought he had no law
but his own will, who did not soon find that he had no end
but his own profit."
2. According to Francis Beanmount (1584-1616)
corruption is a tree, whose branches are of an unmeasurable
length, they spread everywhere, and the dew that drops from
thence, hath infected some chairs and stools of authority.
3. In the Encyclopaedia of Democracy by Seymour Martin
Lipset, Vol.1, page 310, in the Chapter "Corruption", it is
stated that corruption is an abuse of public resources for
private gain. It is known that bribes open the way for
access to the State for those who are willing to pay and can
afford to pay. The situation leaves non-corrupt citizen with
the belief that one counts only if one has the right
personal contact with those who hold power and also allow
persons with money power to get things done to their
advantage through back door.
4. In the present case, as we are concerned with
alleged motivated, arbitrary and high-handed actions of a
Minister, it would be worth-while to point out what role has
been assigned in a parliamentary democracy to a Minister.
The head of the State (President or Governor in our country,
as the case may be,) calls upon the leader of the political
party that commands majority to form government and appoints
him as Prime/Chief Minister; and on later’s advice appoints
other Ministers. Business of the Government, gets allocated
and is run as per business rules framed, which in our
Constitution has been dealt by Article 166(3). The executive
power of the Government is distributed department wise and
one Government is distributed department wise and one
Minister is made the head of that department. That Minister
becomes responsible for the actions, acts and policies of
his department. He becomes principally accountable and
answerable to the people. His powers and duties are
regulated by the law of the land. The legal and moralhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 5
responsibility or liability for the acts or omissions rest
solely on the Minister.
5. Having noted the philosophy, sociology and etymology
of corruption, as well as the essence of a parliamentary
democracy, let it broadly be seen what had happened in the
present case. For this purpose it would be enough to note
some of the prima facie conclusions arrived at by the
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) who was required by
this Court to inquire into the matter (which has come to be
known as Housing Scam) by order dated 14.2.1996.
6. The CBI has since inquired into the master in some
detail and has by now submitted 4 Interim the CBI, orders of
allotment in respect of the shops/stalls in question were
passed by Smt. Shiela Kaul, the then Minister of Urban
Development, and "all the 6 shops have been allotted by her
to her own relation/employees/domestic servants of her
family members and family friends. She has allotted 2 shops
to her 2 grandsons, one shop to the maidservant of her son,
Sh. Vikram Kaul who is residing in Dubai, one ship to
handloom manager of the firm owned by her son-in-law and
another shop to a close friend. One shop has been allotted
to the nephew of the Minister of State, Sh. P.K. Thungon.
While making allotments in respect of stalls, she has
allotted most of stalls to the relations/friends of her
personal staff and officials of Dte. of Estates." The CBI
has also reported that Smt. Shiela Kaul had made ten
different categories of persons as the basis for deciding
allotments, but even this categorisation was not adhered to
while making allotments. The further findings are: (1) "Many
other organisations/persons who had also applied for
allotment of shops/stalls from time to time were not
considered for allotment and no reasons, whatsoever, were
assigned for non-allotment of shops/stalls to them"; and (2)
"At the time of discretionary allotments made by Smt. Shiela
Kaul in 1992 and 1994 persons who were relations of her
personal staff were considered and allotted shops."
7. In the order dated 19.7.1996 this Court noted that a
regular case under sections 120/B, 420,468/471 IPC and
section 13(2) read with 13(1) (d) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988, has been registered against Smt.
Shiela Kaul and her Addl. Private Secretary Rajan S.
Lala and others. The order of that date has also noted
about various other steps taken, which include inssuance of
show cause why allotments of shops/stalls should not be
cancelled. It was desired that the notices be served within
a week and the Estate Officer, after considering their
replies, if any, place a report before the Court within four
weeks.
8. Such a report was filed under the affidavit of Shri
Harcharan Jeet Singh, Director of Estates, which was taken
up for consideration on 16.9.1996. The affidavit of the
Director has stated that from 1994 onwards 52 shops/stalls
had been sanctioned by the then Minister of Urban
Development (Smt. Shiela Kaul) out of which 7 shops were
allotted by Smt. Kaul before she had approved policy of 1994
and the remaining 45 shops were allotted after the policy of
1994. In the affidavit the gist of the objections filed by
the various allottees was enclosed. This Court thought it
appropriate to give an opportunity of hearing to all these
persons before any action was taken. A direction was,
therefore, given to the Director to issue individual notices
to the 52 persons (wrongly mentioned as 42 in the order) to
be personally present in the Court or be represented
through their counsel on 27th September. These alottees so
appeared either in person or through counsel and they werehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 5
heard.. The sum and substance of the representations of the
allottees was that they had been given an allotment either
because of their being unemployed youths, freedom fighters,
handicapped, members of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes,
widow or poverty-stricken.
9. Question is whether they were selected in accordance
with law, which aspect as its importance because apparently
a large number of other persons could as well fall within
the categories in question and had applied also? From the
report of the CBI it is clear that the alottees had been
selected, not by following the tender system, as required by
the policy of 1994, but because of their relationship with
the Minister or her personal staff, or being employees or
friends of such persons. If that be so, the allotments were
wholly arbitrary and speak of misuse of power. All important
question is what is required to be done to undo the wrong
and how the wrong doer is to be dealt with within the
parameters known to law.
10. It would be apposite in this contact to refer to
the recent decision of this Court in Writ Petition (C) No.
26 of 1995 (Common Cause, a Registered Society v. Union of
India) rendered on September 25, 1996, in which one of us
(Kuldip Singh,J.) reiterated the need to act fairly and
justly in the matter of grant of largesses, pointing out
that any arbitrary distribution of national wealth would
violate the law of the land. Mention was made of the
judgment in Lucknow Development Authority v. N.K. Gupta,
1994(1) SCC 243, stating that the same approved
"misfeasance in public office" as a part of the law of the
tort. It was pointed out that public servants become liable
in damages for malicious, deliberate or injurious wrong-
doing.
11. A reference to Wade’s ’Administrative Law’ shows
that a breach of statutory duty does give rise in public law
to liability, which has come to be known as "misfeasance in
public office", and which includes malicious abuse of power.
This aspect has been dealt at pages 789 et al of 7th
Edition. It has been stated that public authorities or
officers may be liable in damages for malicious, deliberate
or injurious wrong-doing. The Supreme Court of Canada in Ron
Carelli v. Duplejis (1959) 16 DLR (2d) 689 awarded damages
against the Prime Minister of Quebec personally for
directing the cancellation of a restaraunt-owner’s liquor
licence. The Supreme Court of Victoria in Farrington v.
Thomson, 1959 VR 280, awarded damages against a licensing
inspector and a police officer who had ordered the
plaintiff to close his hotel and cease supplying liquor,
though they knew they did not posses such a power. Smith J.
referred in that case to the statement of Best CT made in
Henly v. Lyme Corpn., (1858) 5 Bing 91 at 107 reading as
below:-
"Now I take it to be perfectly
clear, that if a public officer
abuses his office, either by an act
of omission or commission, and the
consequence of that is an injury to
an individual, an action may be
maintained against such public
officer. The instance of this are
so numerous that it would be a
waste of time to refer to them."
12. The learned author has then opined that the
cases establish that the tort of misfeasance in public
offices goes at least to the length of imposing liability on
public officer who does an act which to his knowledgehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 5
amounts to an abuse of his office.
13. We may also note what has been stated in this
regard in "Cases and Materials on Administrative Law" by SH
Bailey and others at pages 826 et al of 2nd Edition. The
authors have noted the decision rendered in Bourgoin SA
v.Minister of Agriculture, Fishery and Food, 1985-3 All ER
585, on the subject of misfeasance. In that case damages
were claimed against a Minister, which was held permissible.
Lord Diplock’s observation in Dunlop v. Woolllahar Municipal
Council, 1982 AC 158, that this was "well established"
position was noted.
14. From the aforesaid it is clear that the above has
been accepted as a part of the law of tort practically all
over the world. What is more, in some countries exemplary
damages have been awarded for misuse of public power.
Reference may be made to Deshpriya and another v. Municipal
Council, Nuwara Eliva & Others. which a decision of the
Supreme Court of Sri Lanka dated 10.3.1995, noted at pages
115 to 117 of 1996(1) Commonwealth Human Rights Law Digest
(CHRD). Therein, aggravated award was ordered where
political discrimination was the motive for restricting
freedom of expression. The Supreme court of Bahamas in the
case of Tynes v. Barr, by a decision rendered on 28.3.1994,
ordered for exemplary damages for arbitrary, oppressive or
unconstitutional action by State Officials. A summary of
this decision is reported at pages 117 to 120 of the
aforesaid Law Digest. The need for awarding exemplary
damages was felt by Sauyer, J. because of the arrogant,
abusive and outrageous disregard shown by the police for the
law. The learned Judge awarded $40,505 as special damages; $
75,000 for assault, battery and false imprisonment; $
1,00,000 for malicious prosecution and $ 40,000 for breach
of the plaintiff’s constitutional rights. Reference may also
be made to the decision of supreme Court of Jamaica in
Samulls v. Attorney General (noted at pages 120 to 122 of
the aforesaid Digest) in which Reckford, J. by his decision
dated 11.11.1994 awarded exemplary damages for assault,
battery and malicious prosecution. The award was quantified
at $ 1,00,000.
15. The world jurisprudence has thus accepted
misfeasance in public office as a species of tortious
liability and, to prevent misuse, different courts across
the sea have been awarding exemplary damages.
16. We are conscious that the aforesaid cases dealt
with injury to a third party (following misuse of power) who
had sought damages for the loss caused, whereas in the
present case there is no injury as such to any third person.
Even so, the aforesaid cases have been referred for two
purposes. Firstly and primarily to bring home the position
in law that misuse of power by a public official is
actionable in tort. Secondly, to state that in such cases
damages awarded are exemplary. The fact that there is no
injury to a third person in the present case is not enough
to make the aforesaid principles non-applicable inasmuch as
there was injury to the high principle inasmuch as there was
injury to the high principle in public law that a public
functionary has to use its power for bonafide purpose only
and in a transparent manner. Insofar as the aspect of loss
is concerned, it deserves to be pointed out that there was
loss in present case also; and this was to the State
Exchequer resultant upon giving of allotments without
calling tender as required by the policy. Needless to say
that if tender would have been called, higher revenue would
have been earned by the State on giving the allotments. For
these reasons, we are of the view that the mere fact thathttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 5
in the present case there is no injury to a third person and
he has not come forward to claim damages, has no sequitur in
so far as the tortious liability following misfeasance of
public office is concerned.
17. Now, to take care of the illegality, we have to
take two steps. First, cancel the allotments. To decide as
to who should get the shops/stalls, the Government would
first consider whether its policy of 1994 and categorisation
made by it need alteration in any way. While undertaking
this work, the Government would make such provisions in the
policy which are just and fair. After the policy has been
framed, the shops/stalls would be allotted as per the policy
and by following a procedure having the sanction of law. In
case it would be that any of the present allottees would not
be the person so selected, he/she shall be asked to vacate
the shop/shall by giving three months time. We would require
the Government to formulate the policy within two months and
thereafter to complete the exercise of allotment within two
months. Till then, the present allottees would be allowed to
continue.
18. Secondly, Smt. Shiela Kaul, who was prima facie
personally responsible for the illegal allotments, has to be
asked to show cause as to why damage should not be awarded
against her for her alleged misuse of power. So, a notice be
issued to her to how cause why she should not asked to pay
such sum as damages, for each of the illegal allotments made
by her, as this Court would deem just and proper. The cause
would be shown within three weeks of the receipt of this
order.
19. The issue relating to the matter of illegal
allotments of the aforesaid 52 shops/stalls, stands disposed
of accordingly. It may be put up for further orders on 1st
November, 1996.
20. Let a copy of this order be served on Smt. Shiela
Kaul urgently to enable her to act as ordered in the
judgment. Steps in this regard shall be taken by the
Registry within three days.