http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 6
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 1446-1450 of 2004
PETITIONER:
State of A.P.
RESPONDENT:
S. Narasimha Kumar & Ors.
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 13/07/2006
BENCH:
ARIJIT PASAYAT & S.H. KAPADIA
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
CRIMINAL MISC. PETITION NO. 2335 OF 2005
IN .
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1446-1450 OF 2004
ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
This petition has been filed by wife of one D.V.
Chandrasekhar who was accused no.3 in C.C. No.53/1990
and was respondent no.3 in the appeal. It is to be noted that
the appeal has been filed against the judgment rendered by a
learned Single Judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court
disposing of several Criminal Revision petitions.
All those revision petitions related to the judgment of the
Court of the VII Additional Munsif Magistrate, Guntur in C.C.
No.53 of 1990. The accused persons are described as A-1, A-
2, A-3 etc. A-1 was charged with offences punishable under
Sections 381, 411 and 120-B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
(in short ’IPC’); A-2 to A-11 and A-15 were charged with
offences punishable under Sections 120-B and 414 I.P.C.
A-12 to A-14 were charged with offence punishable under
Section 411 I.P.C. A-4 died during the trial of the case. The
case against A-10 was separated. Through its Judgment
dated 26.11.2000 the trial Court convicted the above said
accused persons for the offences alleged against them and
awarded sentences of various descriptions.
The High Court set aside the conviction and sentence
imposed in respect of the concerned respondents. In the
appeal as noted above, the deceased D.V. Chandrasekhar who
was A-3 is the respondent in the Criminal Appeal relating to
Criminal Revision no.1424 of 2001. The applicant has filed the
present appeal stating that on the death of the said
respondent the appeal abated so far he is concerned. The
logic of Section 394 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(in short ’Cr.P.C.’) was pressed into service. Learned counsel
for the State on the other hand submitted that Section 394
Cr.P.C. does not govern the case of an appeal by special leave
before this Court.
The aforesaid D.V. Chandrasekhar died on 15.1.2004
and leave has been granted on 6.2.2004.http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 6
It is conceded by learned counsel for the parties that
neither in the Cr.P.C. nor in the Supreme Court Rules there is
any provision dealing with such a situation. Section 394
Cr.P.C. reads as follows:
"394. Abatement of appeals. \026 (1) Every appeal
under Section 377 or Section 378 shall finally
abate on the death of the accused.
(2) Every other appeal under this Chapter
(except an appeal from a sentence of fine) shall
finally abate on the death of the appellant:
Provided that where the appeal is against
a conviction and sentence of death or of
imprisonment, and the appellant dies during
the pendency of the appeal, any of his near
relatives may, within thirty days of the death of
the appellant, apply to the Appellate Court for
leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is
granted, the appeal shall not abate.
Explanation \026 In this section, "near
relative" means a parent, spouse, lineal
descendant, brother or sister."
It is to be noted that Section 394 Cr.P.C. corresponds to
Section 431 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (in short
the ’Old Code’).
In Bondada Gajapathi Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh
(AIR 1964 SC 1645) three-judge Bench of this Court was
dealing with the situation as to whether appeal by special
leave against sentence of imprisonment abates on the death of
the accused/appellant. Three separate judgments were
rendered by the Hon’ble Judges. The principles as can be
culled out from the said decision are as follows: (though
rendered in the context of the Old Code are equally applicable
under the Cr.P.C.).
(1) Section 431 of the Old Code does not apply
proprio vigore to a case of appeal filed with the
special leave of the Supreme Court granted under
Article 136 of the Constitution of India, 1950 (in
short the ’Constitution’) when the appellant-accused
dies pending the appeal.
(2) But where the appeal is against sentence of
fine, the appeal may be permitted to be continued
by the legal representatives of the deceased
appellant accused. There is no provision making
such appeals abate. If they can be continued when
arising under the Old Code, there is no reason why
they should not be continued when arising under
the Constitution. If revision petitions may be
allowed to be continued after the death of the
accused so should appeals, for between them no
distinction in principle is possible for the purpose of
continuance.
(3) The principle on which the hearing of a
proceeding may be continued after the death of an
accused would appear to be the effect of the
sentence on his property in the hands of his legalhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 6
representatives. If the sentence affects that
property, the legal representatives can be said to be
interested in the proceeding and allowed to continue
it.
(4) But where the sentence is not one of fine but
of imprisonment, which on the death of the accused
becomes infructuous, the sentence does not affect
the property of the deceased-accused in the hands
of his legal representatives, and therefore, the
appeal, in such a case, would abate, upon the death
of the accused.
(5) In fact that the accused was a government
servant and was under suspension during the trial
and the fact that if the conviction and sentence were
set aside, his estate would be entitled to receive full
pay for the period of suspension, cannot be said to
affect his estate, because, the setting aside of the
sentence would not automatically entitle the legal
representatives to the salary. It would be extending
the principle applied to the case of a sentence of
fine, if on the basis of it appeal against
imprisonment is allowed to be continued by the
legal representatives after the death of the appellant
and for such an extension there is no warrant.
Reference was made to Pranab Kumar Mitra vs.
State of West Bengal and Anr. (AIR 1959 SC 144).
Again in Harnam Singh v. The State of Himachal Pradesh
(1975 (3) SCC 343) the question was examined, and above
principles were re-iterated. It was, inter alia, held as follows:
"6. These contentions require an
examination of Section 431 of the Code which
reads thus:
"Every appeal under Section
411A, sub-section (2), or Section
417 shall finally abate on the death
of the accused, and every other
appeal under this Chapter (except
an appeal from a sentence of fine)
shall finally abate on the death of
the appellant.
7. The appeal before us was filed by special
leave granted under Article 136 of the
Constitution and is neither under Section
411A(2) nor under Section 417 nor under
any other provision of Chapter XXXI of
the Code. Plainly therefore, Section 431
has no application and the question
whether the appeal abated on the death
of the appellant is not governed strictly
by the terms of that Section But, in the
interest of uniformity, there is no valid
reason for applying to appeals under
Article 136 a set of rules different from
those which govern appeals under the
Code in the matter of abatement. It is,
therefore, necessary to find the true
meaning and scope of the provision
contained in Section 431.http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 6
8. Chapter XXXI of the Code of 1898, called
"Of Appeals" contains provisions
governing appeals. The chapter opens
with Section 404 which provides that no
appeal shall lie from any judgment or
order of a Criminal Court except as
provided for by the Code or by any other
law for the time being in force and ends
with Section 431 which deals with
abatement of appeals. Section 411A(2)
provides for appeals to the High Court
from orders of acquittal passed by the
High Court in the exercise of its original
criminal jurisdiction. Section 417 deals
with appeals to the High Court from
original or appellate orders of acquittal
passed by courts other than a High
Court. By Section 431, appeals against
acquittal filed under Section 411A(2) or
Section 417 finally abate on the death of
the accused. Dead persons are beyond
the processes of human tribunal and
recognizing this, the first limb of Section
431 provides that appeals against
acquittals finally abate on the death of
the accused. Where a respondent who
has been acquitted by the lower court
dies, there is no one to answer the charge
of criminality, no one to defend the
appeal and no one to receive the
sentence. It is of the essence of criminal
trials that excepting cases like the release
of offenders on probation, the sentence
must follow upon a conviction. Section
258(2), Section 306(2) and Section 309(2)
of the Code provide, to the extent
material, that where the Magistrate or the
Sessions Judge finds the accused guilty
and convicts him he shall, unless he
proceeds in accordance with the
provisions of Section 562, pass sentence
on the accused according to law.
9. Every other appeal under Chapter XXXI,
except an appeal from a sentence of fine,
finally abates on the death of the
appellant. By "every other appeal" is
meant an appeal other than one against
an order of acquittal, that is to say, an
appeal against an order of conviction.
Every appeal against conviction therefore
abates on the death of the accused except
an appeal from a sentence of fine. An
appeal from a sentence of fine is excepted
from the all pervasive rule of abatement
of criminal appeals for the reason that
the fine constitutes a liability on the
estate of the deceased and the legal
representatives on whom the estate
devolves are entitled to ward off that
liability. By Section 70 of the Penal Code
the fine can be levied at any time within
six years after the passing of the sentence
and if the offender has been sentenced for
a longer period than six years, then athttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 6
any time previous to the expiration of
that period; "and the death of the
offender does not discharge from the
liability any property which would, after
his death, be legally liable for his debts".
The fact that the offender has served the
sentence in default of payment of fine is
not a complete answer to the right of the
Government to realize the fine because
under the proviso to Section 386(1)(b) of
the Code the court can, for special
reasons to be recorded in writing issue a
warrant for realizing the fine even if the
offender has undergone the whole of the
imprisonment in default of payment of
fine. The sentence of fine remains
outstanding though the right to recover
the fine is circumscribed by a sort of a
period of limitation prescribed by Section
70, Penal Code.
10. The narrow question which then requires
to be considered is whether an appeal
from a composite order of sentence
combining the substantive imprisonment
with fine is for the purposes of Section
431 not an appeal from a sentence of
fine. It is true that an appeal from a
composite order of sentence is ordinarily
directed against both the substantive
imprisonment and the fine. But, such an
appeal does not for that reason cease to
be an appeal from a sentence of fine. It is
something more not less than an appeal
from a sentence of fine only and it is
significant that the parenthetical clause
of Section 431 does not contain the word
"only". To limit the operation of the
exception contained in that clause so as
to take away from its purview appeals
directed both against imprisonment and
fine is to read into the clause the word
"only" which is not there and which, by
no technique of interpretation may be
read there. The plain meaning of Section
431 is that every criminal appeal abates
on the death of the accused "except an
appeal from a sentence of fine". The
section for its application requires that
the appeal must be directed to the
sentence of fine and not that it must be
directed to that sentence only. If by the
judgment under appeal a sentence of fine
is imposed either singularly or in
conjunction with a sentence of
imprisonment, the appeal against
conviction would be an appeal from a
sentence of fine within the meaning of
Section 431. All that is necessary is that
a sentence of fine should have been
imposed on the accused and the appeal
filed by him should involve the
consideration of the validity of that
sentence.http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 6 of 6
11. It is difficult to discern any principle
behind the contrary view. The reason of
the rule contained in the exception is that
a sentence of fine operates directly
against the estate of the deceased and
therefore the legal representatives are
entitled to clear the estate from that
liability. Whether or not the sentence of
fine is combined with any other sentence
can make no difference to the application
of that principle."
In view of what has been stated in the aforesaid two
cases, the appeal filed by the Stated of Andhra Pradesh so far
it questions correctness of the judgment in Criminal Revision
no.1424 of 2001 stands abated on the death of the respondent
D.V. Chandrasekhar (A-3). The cause title shall indicate the
applicant’s name to avoid confusion. The application is
accordingly disposed of.