2023INSC770
Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2592 OF 2023
(@ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018)
Central Bureau of Investigation … Appellant
versus
Narottam Dhakad & Anr. … Respondents
with
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2593 OF 2023
(@ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.10680 of 2022)
Central Bureau of Investigation … Appellant
versus
Sunil Singh & Anr. … Respondents
J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1. Leave granted.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
2. Under Section 272 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (for short ‘CrPC’), the State Government has the power
to determine what shall be, for the purposes of CrPC, the
language of each Court within a particular State other than
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 1 of 19the High Court. As provided in Section 6 of CrPC, there are
various Courts in a State. The said Courts are the Courts of
the Session, Judicial Magistrates of the First Class,
Metropolitan Magistrates, Judicial Magistrates of the Second
Class, and Executive Magistrates.
3. In these two appeals, we are dealing with charge sheets
filed by the appellant ­ Central Bureau of Investigation, in
relation to offences arising out of the VYAPAM Scam in the
State of Madhya Pradesh. Charge sheets have been filed for
various offences under Sections 419, 420, 468, 467 and 471
of IPC and under Sections 3 and 4 of the Madhya Pradesh
Examinations Act, 1937. The first respondent in Criminal
Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 5525 of 2018 filed an
application before the learned Judicial Magistrate seeking a
direction to supply a Hindi translation of the charge sheet
filed by the appellant in English language. The contention of
the first respondent accused was that he was unable to
understand the charge sheet filed in English language. The
learned Judicial Magistrate held that the first respondent was
an educated person, having knowledge of English. Learned
Judge pointed out that the offence related to fraud in the
examination. The allegation is that after the first respondent
received admit card, some other person took the examination
by impersonating him. The learned Magistrate observed that
the vakalatnama filed by the first respondent was in English
and the first respondent has also signed in English. It was
further held that the Advocate representing the first
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 2 of 19respondent had sound knowledge of the English language.
Therefore, the learned Magistrate proceeded to reject the
prayer made by the first respondent. The order of the learned
Magistrate has been confirmed by the Sessions Court in
revision. However, the High Court interfered by holding that
Hindi was the only language of the Criminal Courts in the
State and therefore, the first respondent was entitled to seek
a translation of the charge sheet into the language of the
Court.
4. The first respondent in Criminal Appeal, arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 10680 of 2022, is also an accused in the same
case. He also made a similar application before the learned
Magistrate which was rejected. The first respondent
challenged the said order before the High Court. A Division
Bench of the High Court by the impugned judgment held that
when a charge sheet was filed in the language unknown to
the accused, he was entitled to translation of the charge sheet
in the language which he understands.
5. The appellant ­ the Central Bureau of Investigation has
challenged both the impugned orders.
SUBMISSIONS
6. The submission of the appellant in both cases is that
the accused were highly educated and had knowledge of the
English language. Therefore, there is no prejudice to the
accused if the charge sheet was in English language. It was
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 3 of 19also pointed out by the learned counsel appearing for the
appellant that the charge sheets in VYAPAM Scam cases are
very bulky and translation of the charge sheets into Hindi is a
very time­consuming and costly process.
7. The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the
accused is that in the exercise of powers under Section 272 of
CrPC, the State Government has declared Hindi as the only
language of the Criminal Courts in the State. Their
submission is that the language Hindi is for the purposes of
the Code and therefore, charge sheets filed under Section 173
of CrPC ought to be filed in the language of the Court.
Therefore, both the accused supported the view taken by the
High Court. The learned counsel appearing for the accused
also submitted that in a given case if the accused is not
conversant with the language in which the charge sheet has
been filed, he will not be able to defend himself properly as he
will not be in a position to understand the statements
recorded by the police and other documents collected during
investigation.
OUR VIEW
8. The Government of Madhya Pradesh in exercise of
power under Section 272 of CrPC issued a notification dated
28th March 1974, declared Hindi to be the language of each
Court in the State except the High Court. If we consider the
scheme of CrPC, it regulates not only the procedure before the
Criminal Courts but also the procedure to be followed by the
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 4 of 19police and other investigating agencies. Chapter V deals with
the arrest of persons. Chapter VI deals with processes to be
issued for compelling the appearance of the accused before
the Court. Chapter VII deals with processes to be issued to
compel the production of things before the Court. Chapter
VIII contains provisions regarding security for keeping the
peace and for good behaviour. The powers under the said
Chapter are to be exercised by the Courts under the CrPC or
an Executive Magistrate, as the case may be. Chapter X
contains the steps to be taken for the maintenance of public
order and tranquillity. Chapter IX contains Section 125 which
confers powers on the Courts of the Judicial Magistrate, First
Class to order payment of maintenance to wives, children and
parents. Chapter XI deals with the preventive action of the
police. Chapter XII contains elaborate provisions regarding
the registration of First Information Reports, and the
investigation of offences in cognizable or non­cognizable
cases.
9. Section 173 forms part of Chapter XII which contains
provisions regarding a police report which is popularly known
as a charge sheet. We are, therefore, reproducing Section 173
of CrPC which reads thus:
“173. Report of police officer on
completion of investigation.­­(1) Every
investigation under this Chapter shall be
completed without unnecessary delay.
(1A) The investigation in relation to an
offence under sections 376, 376A, 376AB,
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 5 of 19376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or 376E
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall
be completed within two months from the
date on which the information was recorded
by the officer in charge of the police station.
(2) (i) As soon as it is completed, the officer
in charge of the police station shall forward
to a Magistrate empowered to take
cognizance of the offence on a police report,
a report in the form prescribed by the State
Government, stating­­
(a) the names of the parties;
(b) the nature of the information;
(c) the names of the persons who appear to
be acquainted with the circumstances of the
case;
(d) whether any offence appears to have
been committed and, if so, by whom;
(e) whether the accused has been arrested;
(f) whether he has been released on his bond
and, if so, whether with or without sureties;
(g) whether he has been forwarded in
custody under section 170.
(h) whether the report of medical
examination of the woman has been
attached where investigation relates to an
offence under sections 376, 376A, 376AB,
376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB] or
section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860).
(ii) The officer shall also communicate, in
such manner as may be prescribed by the
State Government, the action taken by him,
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 6 of 19to the person, if any, by whom the
information relating to the commission of
the offence was first given.
(3) Where a superior officer of police has
been appointed under section 158, the
report shall, in any case in which the State
Government by general or special order so
directs, be submitted through that officer,
and he may, pending the orders of the
Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the
police station to make further investigation.
(4) Whenever it appears from a report
forwarded under this section that the
accused has been released on his bond, the
Magistrate shall make such order for the
discharge of such bond or otherwise as he
thinks fit.
(5) When such report is in respect of a
case to which section 170 applies, the
police officer shall forward to the
Magistrate along with the report­­
(a) all documents or relevant extracts
thereof on which the prosecution
proposes to rely other than those already
sent to the Magistrate during
investigation;
(b) the statements recorded under section
161 of all the persons whom the
prosecution proposes to examine as its
witnesses.
(6) If the police officer is of opinion that any
part of any such statement is not relevant to
the subject­matter of the proceedings or that
its disclosure to the accused is not essential
in the interests of justice and is inexpedient
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 7 of 19in the public interest, he shall indicate that
part of the statement and append a note
requesting the Magistrate to exclude that
part from the copies to be granted to the
accused and stating his reasons for making
such request.
(7) Where the police officer investigating the
case finds it convenient so to do, he may
furnish to the accused copies of all or any of
the documents referred to in sub­section (5).
(8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed
to preclude further investigation in respect
of an offence after a report under sub­
section (2) has been forwarded to the
Magistrate and, where upon such
investigation, the officer in charge of the
police station obtains further evidence, oral
or documentary, he shall forward to the
Magistrate a further report or reports
regarding such evidence in the form
prescribed; and the provisions of sub­
sections (2) to (6) shall, as far as may be,
apply in relation to such report or reports as
they apply in relation to a report forwarded
under sub­section (2).”
(emphasis supplied)
10. As can be seen from sub­section (2) of Section 173, after
completion of the investigation, the officer in charge of the
police station is under an obligation to submit a report to the
learned Magistrate in the form prescribed by the State
Government, giving particulars as mentioned in sub­section
(2). Sub­section (5) is applicable in a case governing Section
170. It applies when it appears to the officer in charge of the
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 8 of 19police station that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable
ground justifying the forwarding of the accused to the learned
Magistrate. In such a case, along with the report, the officer
in charge of the police station is bound to forward copies of
the statements recorded under Section 161 of all the persons
whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses.
It also enjoins the officer in charge of the police station to
forward all the documents or relevant extracts thereof on
which the prosecution proposes to rely upon other than those
already sent to the Magistrate during the investigation. Sub­
section (6) of Section 173 confers power on the learned
Magistrate to exclude certain parts of the material produced
along with the charge sheet while supplying copies thereof to
the accused.
11. Section 173 will have to be read with Section 207 which
mandates that after cognizance is taken of the offence by the
learned Magistrate on a case instituted on a police report, it is
the obligation of the learned Magistrate to furnish free of cost,
without any delay, copies of the police report, first information
report, statements recorded under sub­section (3) of Section
161 of CrPC except the portion in respect of which there is an
order passed by the learned Magistrate by invoking powers
under sub­section (6) of Section 173, confessions and
statements recorded under Section 164 and copies of the
documents or relevant extracts forwarded along with the
police report in accordance with sub­section (5) of Section
173. When the statements of the witnesses or documents
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 9 of 19covered by sub­section (5) of Section 173 are very bulky, the
learned Magistrate has the discretion to allow the accused
and his advocate to inspect the said documents instead of
providing copies thereof. It is pertinent to note that there is no
provision either in Chapter XII or Chapter XVI of CrPC which
makes it obligatory to file charge sheets/reports in the
language of the Court.
12. Interestingly, the provision regarding the language of
Courts in the form of Section 272 finds a place in Chapter
XXIII having the heading “Evidence in inquiries and Trials”.
The provision is incorporated under the sub­heading “A.—
Mode of taking and recording evidence”. Section 272 reads
thus:
“272. Language of Courts.—The State
Government may determine what shall be, for
purposes of this Code, the language of each
Court within the State other than the High
Court.”
Thus, the power of the State Government is to determine for
the purposes of CrPC what shall be the language of the Courts
within the State other than the High Court. The power under
Section 272 is not a power to decide which language shall be
used by the investigating agencies or the police for the
purposes of maintaining the record of the investigation. At
the highest, for that purpose, the provisions regarding the law
governing the Official Language of the State may apply subject
to the provisions contained in such enactment. In a given
case, while prescribing a form as required by Sub­section (2)
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 10 of 19of Section 173, the State Government may provide that the
charge sheet must be filed in the official language of the State.
Therefore, Section 272 deals with only the language of the
Courts under CrPC.
13. It is interesting to note that wherever legislature
intended, specific provisions have been made incorporating
the requirement using the language of the Court. Some of
these provisions also deal with situations when the accused is
unable to understand the language of the Court
14. We are giving a summary of the relevant provisions of
CrPC which have some bearing on the issue of the language of
the Court:
a. Sub­section (6) of Section 211 provides that the
charge shall be written in the language of the Court.
However, Section 215 provides that no error in the
charge shall be regarded at any stage of the case as
material unless the accused was in fact misled due
to error or omission and it has occasioned a failure
of justice. Therefore, in a given case, even if the
charge is not framed in the language of the Court,
the omission to frame the charge in the language of
the Court shall not be material unless it is shown
that the accused was misled and it resulted in
failure of justice.
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 11 of 19b. Section 228 forms part of Chapter XVIII, which deals
with trial before a Court of Sessions. Sub­section (2)
of Section 228 mandates that the Court must read
over and explain the charge to the accused. It
follows that if the accused does not understand the
language in which the charge is framed, the Court
will have to explain the charge to him in the
language which he understands.
c. Section 240 which forms part of Chapter XVIII
dealing with the trial of warrant cases by Magistrates
provides that the charge shall be framed in writing
and the learned Magistrate shall read over and
explain the charge to the accused. Though the
Section does not make it mandatory, normally, the
charge will be framed in the language of the Court
determined in accordance with Section 272 of CrPC.
Therefore, if the accused is not conversant with the
language in which the charge is framed, it is the
duty of the Magistrate to explain the charge to the
accused in a language which he understands.
d. If we compare provisions of Chapters XVIII, XIX, XX,
and XXI which deal with sessions triable cases,
warrant triable cases, summons triable cases, and
summary trials, either there is a requirement of
explaining the charge to the accused, or there is a
requirement of stating the particulars of the offence
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 12 of 19to the accused. These requirements can be fulfilled
only by explaining to the accused in the language
which he understands.
e. Only in the case of summary trials under Chapter
XXI, there is a specific provision under Section 265
that the record of the case shall be in the language
of the Court.
f. Section 277 (b) permits a witness to give evidence in
any other language which is not the language of the
Court. It lays down the procedure for recording
such evidence.
g. There is a salutatory provision in the form of Section
279 under Chapter XXIII dealing with evidence in
inquiries and trials. Section 279 reads thus:
“279. Interpretation of evidence to
accused or his pleader.—(1) Whenever
any evidence is given in a language not
understood by the accused, and he is
present in Court in person, it shall be
interpreted to him in open Court in a
language understood by him.
(2) If he appears by pleader and the
evidence is given in a language other
than the language of the Court, and not
understood by the pleader, it shall be
interpreted to such pleader in that
language.
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 13 of 19(3) When documents are put for the
purpose of formal proof, it shall be in
the discretion of the Court to interpret
as much thereof as appears necessary.”
Thus, where evidence is recorded in the language of the Court
which is not understood by the accused or his pleader, there
is an obligation on the part of the Court to explain the
evidence to the accused or his lawyer, as the case may be.
h. Section 281 provides that if the examination of the
accused made by the Court is reduced into writing
in a language which the accused does not
understand, the statement is required to be
interpreted to him in a language which he
understands and after such interpretation is made,
the accused has the liberty to explain and add to his
answers.
i. Under Section 354, it is provided that judgment in
every trial of a Criminal Court must be written in
the language of the Court. Either in Section 353 or
354, there is no provision which requires the Court
to interpret the judgment to the accused even if the
accused does not understand the language of the
Court.
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 14 of 1915. The conclusion which can be drawn from the provisions
of CrPC and in particular the provisions referred to above is
that wherever the legislature intended, there is a specific
provision incorporated requiring the Court to mandatorily use
the language of the Court in the proceedings. There is no
such requirement laid down in respect of the report/charge
sheet under Section 173 of CrPC.
16. There are two provisions in CrPC which deal with the
effect of error, omission, or irregularity in the proceedings of
the trial of a criminal case. The first is Section 464 which
deals with the effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or
error in, charge. It lays down that only on the ground of such
omission, absence, or error, the ultimate finding, sentence or
order will not be invalid unless a failure of justice has in fact
been occasioned thereby. Section 465 incorporates the same
test of the failure of justice while dealing with any error,
omission, or irregularity in the proceedings. While deciding
whether there is a failure of justice occasioned due to error,
omission, or irregularity in the trial, the Court is required to
consider the fact whether the objection could and should have
been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings. There is a
specific provision to that effect under sub­section (2) of
Section 465.
17. Therefore, in a given case, if something which CrPC
specifically requires to be done in the language of the Court is
done in any other language, per se, the proceedings will not
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 15 of 19be vitiated unless it is established that the omission has
resulted in failure of justice. While deciding the issue of
whether there is a failure of justice, the Court will have to
consider whether the objection was raised at the earliest
available opportunity.
18. Now, coming to the issue of the language of the final
report/charge sheet under Section 173, there is no specific
provision in CrPC which requires the investigating
agency/officer to file it in the language of the Court
determined in accordance with Section 272 of CrPC. Even if
such a requirement is read into Section 173, per se, the
proceedings will not be vitiated if the report is not in the
language of the Court. The test of failure of justice will have to
be applied in such a case as laid down in Section 465 of
CrPC.
19. Under Section 207, it is the obligation of the learned
Judicial Magistrate to supply a copy of the report and other
documents as provided in Section 207 to the accused. In a
case triable by the Court of Sessions, Section 208 provides for
the learned Magistrate to provide copies of the statements and
documents to the accused including the statements and
confessions recorded under Section 164 of CrPC. When a
copy of the report and the documents are supplied to the
accused under Section 207 and/or Section 208, an
opportunity is available for the accused to contend that he
does not understand the language in which the final report or
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 16 of 19the statements or documents are written. But he must raise
this objection at the earliest. In such a case, if the accused is
appearing in person and wants to defend himself without
opting for legal aid, perhaps there may be a requirement of
supplying a translated version of the charge sheet and
documents or the relevant part thereof concerning the said
accused to him. It is, however, subject to the accused
satisfying the Court that he is unable to understand the
language in which the charge sheet is submitted. When the
accused is represented by an advocate who fully understands
the language of the final report or charge sheet, there will not
be any requirement of furnishing translations to the accused
as the advocate can explain the contents of the charge sheet
to the accused. If both the accused and his advocate are not
conversant with the language in which the charge sheet has
been filed, then the question of providing translation may
arise. The reason is that the accused must get a fair
opportunity to defend himself. He must know and understand
the material against him in the charge sheet. That is the
essence of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. With the
availability of various software and Artificial Intelligence tools
for making translations, providing translations will not be
that difficult now. In the cases mentioned aforesaid, the
Courts can always direct the prosecution to provide a
translated version of the charge sheet. But we must hasten to
add that a charge sheet filed within the period provided either
under Section 167 of CrPC or any other relevant statute in a
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 17 of 19language other than the language of the Court or the
language which the accused does not understand, is not
illegal and no one can claim a default bail on that ground.
20. There is one more aspect of the matter. There are
central agencies like the National Investigation Agency,
Central Bureau of Investigation, etc. These agencies
investigate serious offences or offences having wide
ramifications. Obviously, such central agencies, in every case
will not be in a position to file the final report in the language
of the concerned Court as determined by Section 272 of CrPC.
21. Now, coming to the facts of the case, in Criminal Appeal
arising out of SLP (Crl.) 5525 of 2018, a finding of fact was
recorded by the trial court that the respondent is an educated
person. The offence relates to an examination for which one of
the eligibility conditions was having a knowledge of the
English language. Moreover, it was found that the advocate
engaged by him also knows the English language. Coming to
the Criminal Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) 10680 of 2022,
the trial court has recorded a finding that the first
respondent­accused was a science graduate having knowledge
of the English language. Moreover, his advocate was
conversant with the English language.
22. Hence, in the facts of the cases in hand, it cannot be
said that a non­supply of translation of the charge sheet and
other documents to the accused in both appeals will occasion
a failure of justice.
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 18 of 1923. Hence, the appeals succeed and subject to what is held
in the earlier part of the judgment, the impugned orders are
set aside. There will be no order as to costs. The Trial Court
shall expeditiously proceed with the trial.
….…………………….J.
(Abhay S. Oka)
…..…………………...J.
(Rajesh Bindal)
New Delhi;
August 25, 2023.
SLP (Crl.) No.5525 of 2018 etc. Page 19 of 19