http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 4
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 634 of 2007
PETITIONER:
Jodhraj Singh
RESPONDENT:
State of Rajasthan
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 27/04/2007
BENCH:
S.B. Sinha & Markandey Katju
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 634 OF 2007
[Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 2284 of 2006]
S.B. SINHA, J :
Leave granted.
Appellant together with various others were tried for commission of
an offence under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code for causing murder of
one Vishava Priya @ Lalla on 13.12.1992. A First Information Report in
relation to the said incident was lodged by one Ashok Kumar Sharma. The
incident allegedly took place at about 6 p.m. on the said date. In the First
Information Report, the complainant alleged that at the said date and time
when he himself and his uncle Mahendra Kumar had been getting the Pattis
loaded near the road, a tempo (a three wheeler) occupied by one Ajij Naeem,
Bhupendra and the appellant arrived. The accused were armed with
weapons like lathi, dhariya, ballam and sariya. As there existed a dispute
between the deceased and Bhupendra, apprehending that they may kill him,
the complainant and the said Mahendra Kumar immediately came to the
place of occurrence and found the appellant and others assaulting the
deceased. They, on seeing them, ran away. A First Information Report was
lodged at about 9.10 p.m. on the same day. Appellant was named therein
along with others, wherein it was alleged that he was armed with a gandasi
and he along with others assaulted the deceased. It was furthermore alleged
that Bhupendra had thrown a stone on the deceased, due to which he
suffered a wound on his head. Investigation into commission of the offence
was carried out. Upon completion of the investigation, a chargesheet was
filed against the appellant as also the said Ajij, Naeem and Bhupendra.
Appellant had been absconding for about seven years. His case was
separated from that of the other accused. Two separate trials, thus, took
place in relation to the said incident.
In the first trial involving the accused named in the First Information
Report, other than the appellant, several witnesses were examined. Two of
them, viz., Ram Het (PW-8) and Ghasi Lal (PW-9) fully supported the
prosecution case. One Pratap Yadav (PW-10) and Alok Tripathi (PW-14),
however, were declared hostile therein. In the second trial, where the
appellant was involved, they also turned hostile. Appellant was, however,
convicted. Four separate appeals were preferred before the High Court.
The learned Sessions Judge as also the High Court, however, relied on
the testimonies of the said witnesses as they, when confronted with their
earlier statements, accepted that they had deposed against the appellant.
According to them, they did so on having been asked to do so by some
villagers. The learned Sessions Judge as also the High Court did not relyhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 4
upon that part of the testimonies of the said witnesses. The High Court,
therefore, by reason of the impugned judgment upheld the conviction and
sentence of the appellant.
Mr. Mohan Pandey, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant, at the very outset drew our attention to the fact that the deceased
was a known criminal and a large number of cases were pending against him
and as such the possibility of his being killed by some unknown persons
cannot be ruled out. It was submitted that as four prosecution witnesses had
turned hostile, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained.
The first informant Ashok Kumar Sharma examined himself as PW-
17. He, as noticed hereinbefore, not only named the appellant in the First
Information Report but also in his deposition, he categorically stated about
the role played by each of the accused persons. He stated that the appellant
took part in the entire assault and furthermore inflicted a gandasi blow on the
head of the deceased. He knew all the accused persons including the
appellant from his childhood.
Both the learned Trial Judge as also the High Court relied upon the
testimonies of the said witness. We see no reason to differ therewith.
Dr. Rakesh Kumar Sharma (PW-13) conducted the post mortem on
the dead body of the deceased at about 9.45 a.m. on 14.12.1992. He found
the following ante-mortem injuries on the person of the deceased:
"1. Abrasion < x < on left shoulder posteriorily.
2. Lacerated wound 1" x 1/2" x B.D. vertical on
left side of chin.
3. Lacerated would 1" x =" x 1" on left angle of
mouth.
4. Lacerated wound 3" x 1" x 2" on fore head left
side.
Bone broken in pieces, brain matter, badly
lacerated eye ball pushed inside.
5. Abrasion 1" x =" vertical on left cheek.
6. Lacerated wound 1" x =" x =" on left frontal
parietal scalp.
7. Incised wound 4" x 2" x 2" transverse tempo
parietal region left side, and
8. Bruise 1" x 1" on nose."
Ram Het (PW-2 in the first trial and PW-8 in the second) spoke in
details about the participation of the accused persons including the appellant
herein. So did the other eye-witness Ghasi Lal (PW-9).
In both the trials, common witnesses were examined. At the cost of
repetition, we may state that the first informant had supported the
prosecution case in its entirety in both the trials. He has been believed.
The High Court took up all the appeals together for hearing. The only
distinctive fact in the case involving the appellant was PWs 8 and 9 turned
hostile, but the same, in our opinion, would not materially alter the
prosecution case, as a conviction can even be based on the testimony of a
single witness. The courts furthermore are entitled to rely upon a part of the
testimony of a witness who has been permitted to be cross-examined by the
prosecution.
In State of U.P. v. Ramesh Prasad Misra and Another [(1996) 10 SCC
360], this Court opined:
"7. The question is whether the first respondent
was present at the time of death or was away in the
village of DW 1, his brother-in-law. It is rather
most unfortunate that these witnesses, one ofhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 4
whom was an advocate, having given the
statements about the facts within their special
knowledge, under Section 161 recorded during
investigation, have resiled from correctness of the
versions in the statements. They have not given
any reason as to why the investigating officer
could record statements contrary to what they had
disclosed. It is equally settled law that the evidence
of a hostile witness would not be totally rejected if
spoken in favour of the prosecution or the accused,
but it can be subjected to close scrutiny and that
portion of the evidence which is consistent with
the case of the prosecution or defence may be
accepted\005"
[See also Gurpreet Singh v. State of Haryana, (2002) 8 SCC 18 and
Gagan Kanojia & Anr. v. State of Punjab, 2006 (12) SCALE 479]
Moreover, while recording a judgment of conviction, the court may
consider a part of the deposition of a witness who had been permitted to be
cross-examined by prosecution having regard to the fact situation obtaining
in the said case. How the evidence adduced before it shall be appreciated by
the court would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
It is trite that only because a witness, for one reason or the other, has,
to some extent, resiled from his earlier statement by itself may not be
sufficient to discard the prosecution case in its entirety. The courts even in
such a situation are not powerless. Keeping in view the materials available
on record, it is permissible for a court of law to rely upon a part of the
testimony of the witness who has been declared hostile.
Appellant was seen in the company of the other accused. Sufficient
materials have been brought on records to establish that he participated in
commission of the offence. All the accused persons came together in a
tempo. They were armed with various weapons. They assaulted the
deceased. The learned Sessions Judge as also the High Court found
existence of a motive for commission of the offence. They left the place of
occurrence together. It may be that the ultimate cause of death was found to
be an assault by stone on the head of the deceased which is said to be the act
of Bhupendra but only by reason thereof existence of the common intention
on the part of the appellant cannot be said to be absent.
Reliance by the learned counsel for the appellant on Mithu Singh v.
State of Punjab [(2001) 4 SCC 193] is misplaced. Therein, no overt act was
attributed to the appellant therein. The court found that no evidence was
brought on records as against him, save and except ipse dixit on the part of
the witnesses. This Court, in the aforementioned fact situation, opined:
"6. To substantiate a charge under Section 302
with the aid of Section 34 it must be shown that
the criminal act complained against was done by
one of the accused persons in furtherance of the
common intention of both. Common intention has
to be distinguished from same or similar intention.
It is true that it is difficult, if not impossible, to
collect and produce direct evidence in proof of the
intention of the accused and mostly an inference as
to intention shall have to be drawn from the acts or
conduct of the accused or other relevant
circumstances, as available. An inference as to
common intention shall not be readily drawn; the
culpable liability can arise only if such inference
can be drawn with a certain degree of assurance.
At the worst Mithu Singh, accused-appellant, knew
that his co-accused Bharpur Singh was armed withhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 4
a pistol. The knowledge of previous enmity
existing between Bharpur Singh and the deceased
can also be attributed to Mithu Singh. But there is
nothing available on record to draw an inference
that the co-accused Bharpur Singh had gone to the
house of the deceased with the intention of causing
her death and such intention was known to Mithu
Singh, much less shared by him. Simply because
Mithu Singh was himself armed with a pistol
would not necessarily lead to an inference that he
had also reached the house of the deceased or had
accompanied the co-accused Bharpur Singh with
the intention of causing the death of Gurdial Kaur.
In our opinion, an inference as to Mithu Singh,
accused-appellant having shared with Bharpur
Singh a common intention of causing the murder
of the deceased Gurdial Kaur cannot be drawn. His
conviction under Sections 302/34 IPC cannot be
sustained and must be set aside."
Such is not the position here.
In Vaijayanti Vs. State of Maharashtra, [(2005) 13 SCC 134], as
regards formation of common intention, this Court opined:
"Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code envisages that
"when a criminal act is done by several persons in
furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such
persons, is liable for that act, in the same manner as if it
were done by him alone". The underlying principle
behind the said provision is joint liability of persons in
doing of a criminal act which must have found in the
existence of common intention of enmity in the acts in
committing the criminal act in furtherance thereof. The
law in this behalf is no longer res integra. There need not
be a positive overt act on the part of the person
concerned. Even an omission on his part to do something
may attract the said provision. But it is beyond any cavil
of doubt that the question must be answered having
regard to the fact situation obtaining in each case."
[See also Triloki Nath and Others v. State of U.P., (2005) 13 SCC
323]
In Pardeep Kumar v. Union Administration, Chandigarh [(2006) 10
SCC 608], this Court opined:
"12. It is settled law that the common intention or
the intention of the individual concerned in
furtherance of the common intention could be
proved either from direct evidence or by inference
from the acts or attending circumstances of the
case and conduct of the parties. Direct proof of
common intention is seldom available and,
therefore, such intention can only be inferred from
the circumstances appearing from the proved facts
of the case and the proved circumstances."
We are, having regard to the materials brought on record by the
prosecution, satisfied that the appellant shared common intention with the
other accused in committing the crime.
We, therefore, do not find any infirmity in judgments of the learned
Sessions Judge and the High Court. The appeal is dismissed accordingly.