1
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1163 OF 2009
PATTARVAYAL KANAKAN APPELLANT
VERSUS
STATE OF KERALA RESPONDENT
O R D E R
1. This criminal appeal is directed against the
judgment and order passed by the High Court of
Judicature of Kerala at Ernakulam in Criminal Appeal No.
2107 of 2004, dated 01.12.2007. By the impugned judgment
and order, the High Court has confirmed the judgment and
order, dated 16.11.2004, passed by the Trial Court in
Sessions Case No. 46 of 2002, whereby the appellant is
convicted for offence punishable under Sections 143,
147, 148, and 302 read with Section 149 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (“the IPC” for short) and sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.
2. This case relates to the murder of one
Purushothaman (“the deceased” for short) by the
appellant-accused and six other accused persons on
01.11.1998. At 9:15 p.m., on the fateful night, the
deceased was attacked by a group, comprising of the
Page 12
accused persons, while he was proceeding towards the
house of his neighbour (PW-3) to attend a phone call
from his wife’s house. The deceased’s sister (PW-1)
followed him at a distance and thus was an eye-witness
to the incident in its entirety. The deceased was first
inflicted a blow with a pestle (MO1) on his head by the
appellant and thereafter as he fell down, the six other
accused persons attacked him with the iron rod, knife,
chopper, axe, etc. As soon as PW-1, the wife of
deceased, his brother (PW-2) and his uncle (CW-5),
amongst others, reached the spot, the accused persons
escaped leaving behind MO1. PW-1 and PW-2 rushed the
deceased to the hospital, however, the deceased
succumbed to his injuries.
3. The First Information Report (“the FIR” for short)
was registered for offence punishable under Sections
143, 147, 148 and 307 read with Section 149 of the IPC,
specifically implicating only the appellant. On
completion of the investigation, the appellant and six
other accused persons were charge-sheeted for offences
under Sections 143, 147, 148 and 302 read with Section
149 of the IPC. During the pendency of the trial, one
accused person had died and, thus, only the appellant
and five other accused persons were tried for the above
mentioned offence.
Page 23
4. The Trial Court has, after marshalling the
evidence on record including evidence of the eye-
witnesses, i.e., PW-1 and PW-2, acquitted the other five
accused persons by extending the benefit of doubt on the
finding that the identity of the said five accused
persons could not be established by acceptable evidence
and, ergo, their presence as members of the unlawful
assembly is not conclusively proved. However, the
appellant was convicted on findings, first, that it is
only the appellant who is specifically implicated in the
FIR by PW-1, second, that the evidence of PW-2
corroborates PW-1’s identification of the appellant and
third, that the deadly blow caused by the appellant
using MO1 corroborated with the injuries in the Post
Mortem Report.
5. The appellant, aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment
had approached the High Court. The High Court has re-
appreciated the entire evidence on record and analyzed
the submissions of the parties, inter-alia, that the
ante-mortem injuries of the deceased tally with the
injuries inflicted by the appellant and that the
evidence of eye-witnesses is credit-worthy. Accordingly,
the High Court has confirmed the conviction and sentence
of the appellant.
Page 34
6. The appellant, aggrieved by the confirmation of
his conviction and sentence by the High Court, has
approached this Court in this appeal.
7. We have heard Shri V. Giri, learned senior counsel
for the appellant and Shri Ramesh Babu, learned counsel
for the respondent-State. Shri Giri would assail the
impugned judgment and order by contending, inter alia,
that the Courts below, ought not have accepted the
evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 while convicting the appellant
alone.
8. We have carefully perused the judgment and order
passed by the Courts below and have re-appreciated the
evidence on record including the evidence of the eye-
witnesses and the report of the medical officer. It is
upon such perusal that we do not find any merit in the
aforesaid submissions advanced before us by learned
counsel for the appellant. In our considered view,
neither the Trial Court nor the High Court has committed
any error, whatsoever, which would call for our
interference.
Page 45
9. In the result, the appeal is dismissed.
Ordered accordingly.
.......................J.
(H.L. DATTU)
.......................J.
(RANJAN GOGOI)
NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 08, 2013.
Page 5