http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 4
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 1045 of 2000
PETITIONER:
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
R.S. PAI AND ANOTHER
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 03/04/2002
BENCH:
M.B. Shah, Brijesh Kumar & D.M. Dharmadhikari
JUDGMENT:
Shah, J.
Short question iswhether prosecution can produce additional
documents which are gathered during investigation, after submitting
charge-sheet under Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973?
The Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions
in Securities) at Bombay by judgment and order dated 26th July, 2000,
rejected Miscellaneous Application No.338 of 2000 in Special Case
No.3 of 1997 filed by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for
production of additional documents in a case where application for
discharging the respondents was filed. Aggrieved by the said
judgment, the CBI has preferred this appeal.
The prosecution story in brief is thatduring the period
2.4.1992 to 20.5.1992, the FIM Division, Mumbai of Syndicate Bank
received funds aggregating to Rs.132.23 crores for Portfolio
Management from Oil Industries Development Board, New Delhi. It
was alleged that R. Sundaresan, the then Divisional Manager of the
Bank and other bank officials conspired during the above said period
at Mumbai along with Directors and office bearers of M/s Fair
Growth Investments Ltd. and M/s Fair Growth Financial Services Ltd
and by dishonestly and fraudulently abusing their position as a public
servant caused wrongful gain to private parties and corresponding loss
to the Syndicate Bank. It is also alleged that an amount of Rs.90.58
crores was invested for the purpose of shares/debentures from M/s
Fair Growth Financial Services Ltd. and others without specific
authorization from the Head Office of the Bank and without adhering
to the guidelines of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the SEBI. On
2.6.1993, on the written complaint of the Chief Vigilance Officer of
the Bank, case No. RC 1(BSC)/93-Mum. was registered under Section
120-B read with Section 420 IPC and Section 13(2) read with Section
13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 against R. Sundaresan
Divisional Manager of Syndicate Bank and K.R.N. Shenoy, Managing
Director of M/s Fair Growth Investments Ltd. After investigation,
charge-sheet was filed by the CBI in the Special Court in Special Case
No.3/97 at Bombay against respondent nos.1 and 2. On 27.1.2000,
respondent nos.1 and 2 filed discharge application bearing Misc.
Application No.51 of 2000 and Misc. Application No.168 of 2000
before the Special Court. Pending hearing those applications,http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 4
appellant sought production of additional documents, which were
gathered during investigation but were not produced before the Court.
That application was rejected. Hence, this appeal.
Mr. P.P. Malhotra, learned senior counsel for the appellant
submitted that the order passed by the Special Judge is on the face of
it illegal and contrary to the provisions of Section 173 (5) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure. It is his contention that normally the
Investigating Officer is required to produce all the relevant documents
at the time of submitting report, but the Investigating Officer
committed mistake in not producing certain documents as in his
opinion those documents were not relevant. Thereafter, it was found
that those documents were relevant so as to connect the accused with
the crime. It is submitted that arguments for framing of the charge
were not finally heard and, therefore, there was no justifiable reason
to reject the application for production of additional documents.
As against this, Mr. P. V. Adhyaru, learned senior counsel for
respondent no.2 submitted that under Section 173 (5) Cr.P.C., the
Investigating Officer has to produce all the documents at the time of
submitting the report. Therefore, the order passed by the Special
Court cannot be said, in any way, to be illegal or erroneous.
For appreciating the rival contentions, we would first refer to
the relevant part of Section 173 of the Cr.P.C., which read as under:-
"173 Report of police officer on completion of
investigation.(1) Every investigation under this
Chapter shall be completed without unnecessary delay.
(2) (i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in
charge of the police station shall forward to a Magistrate
empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police
report, a report in the form prescribed by the State
Government, stating
(a) the names of the parties;
(b) the nature of the information;
(c) the names of the persons who appear to be
acquainted with the circumstances of the
case;
(d) whether any offence appears to have been
committed and, if so, by whom;
(e) whether the accused has been arrested;
(f) whether he has been released on his bond
and, if so, whether with or without sureties;
(g) whether he has been forwarded in custody
under Section 170.
(ii) The officer shall also communicate, in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State government,
the action taken by him to the person, if any, by whom
the information relating to the commission of the offence
was first given.
(3) ..
(4) ..http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 4
(5) When such report is in respect of a case to
which Section 170 applies, the police officer shall
forward to the Magistrate along with the report
(a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on
which the prosecution proposes to rely other
than those already sent to the Magistrate
during investigation;
(b) the statements recorded under Section 161 of
all the persons whom the prosecution proposes
to examine as its witnesses.
(6) ..
(7) ..
(8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
preclude further investigation in respect of
an offence after a report under sub-section
(2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate
and, where upon such investigation, the
officer in charge of the police station obtains
further evidence, oral or documentary, he
shall forward to the Magistrate a further
report or reports regarding such evidence in
the form prescribed; and the provisions of
sub-sections (2) to (6) shall, as far as may
be, apply in relation to such report or reports
as they apply in relation to a report
forwarded under sub-section (2)."
From the aforesaid sub-sections, it is apparent that normally,
the Investigating Officer is required to produce all the relevant
documents at the time of submitting the charge-sheet. At the same
time, as there is no specific prohibition, it cannot be held that the
additional documents cannot be produced subsequently. If some
mistake is committed in not producing the relevant documents at the
time of submitting the report or charge-sheet, it is always open to the
Investigating Officer to produce the same with the permission of the
Court. In our view, considering the preliminary stage of prosecution
and the context in which Police Officer is required to forward to the
Magistrate all the documents or the relevant extracts thereof on which
prosecution proposes to rely, the word ’shall’ used in sub-section (5)
cannot be interpreted as mandatory, but as directory. Normally, the
documents gathered during the investigation upon which the
prosecution wants to rely are required to be forwarded to the
Magistrate, but if there is some omission, it would not mean that the
remaining documents cannot be produced subsequently. Analogous
provision under Section 173(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898 was considered by this Court in Narayan Rao v. The State of
Andhra Pradesh [(1958) SCR 283 at 293] and it was held that the
word ’shall’ occurring in sub-section 4 of Section 173 and sub-section
3 of Section 207A is not mandatory but only directory. Further, the
scheme of sub-section (8) of Section 173 also makes it abundantly
clear that even after the charge-sheet is submitted, further
investigation, if called for, is not precluded. If further investigation is
not precluded then there is no question of not permitting the
prosecution to produce additional documents which were gathered
prior to or subsequent to investigation. In such cases, there can not be
any prejudice to the accused. Hence, the impugned order passed by
the Special Court cannot be sustained.
In the result, the appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment
and order passed by the Special Court is set aside. The applicationhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 4
filed by the appellant for production of additional documents is
allowed. The Special Court to proceed with the matter in accordance
with law.
...J.
(M.B. SHAH)
J.
(BRIJESH KUMAR)
J.
(D.M. DHARMADHIKARI)
April 3, 2002