2023 INSC 659 REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4758 OF 2023
[ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 25256 OF 2018]
Ashok Kumar …Appellant (s)
Versus
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. ...Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. The present appeal arises from the final judgment and order
dated 24.01.2018 passed by the National Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission (for short “the National Commission”),
New Delhi in Revision Petition No. 3415 of 2016. By the said
judgment, the National Commission reversed the concurrent
judgments of the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum
1(for short “the District Forum”) and the State Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission (for short “the State Commission”). The
Fora below, while allowing the original complaint had directed
the New India Assurance Company Limited (for short “the
Insurance Company”) to indemnify the Claimant on non-standard
basis to the extent of 75% of the sum assured, which was
Rs.8,40,000/-.
Facts
3. The brief facts, necessary for adjudication of this Appeal,
are as follows:-
a) The appellant was the owner of the truck (dumper)
(hereinafter referred to as “the vehicle”) bearing Registration No.
HR-55C-5385 and had a valid insurance policy (Policy No.
354101/31/07/01/00013342) for the Insured Declared Value of
Rs.8,40,000/- for the period 20.02.2008 to 19.02.2009.
b) On 26.06.2008, the appellant’s driver – Mam Chand had to
unload stone dust at Mittal’s Farm at Shankar ki Dhani. He
parked the vehicle to find out the address. The admitted case is
2that he left the key in the key hole when he got out of the vehicle
to look around for the address.
c) In the letter of repudiation which referred to the statement
of the driver Mam Chand, it was mentioned that Mam Chand
alighted from the vehicle and went to enquire about Mittal’s
Farm, after leaving the key of the said vehicle inside the key hole.
When he had gone some distance, he heard the sound of starting
of the vehicle and he came back and noticed that two persons
were sitting on the driver’s seat of the vehicle and a car was at the
back of the said vehicle in which three persons were there. He
had further stated that they stole and took away the vehicle.
d) On 27.06.2008 itself, the appellant registered an FIR No.
77 at the Bilaspur Police Station, Gurgaon under Section 379 of
the IPC. On 02.07.2008, the Appellant intimated the respondent-
Insurance Company about the theft. On 11.06.2009, the appellant
filed a complaint CPA No. 515 of 2009 before the District Forum,
Gurgaon alleging that the respondent was delaying the settlement
of the claim and, as such, committed deficiency in service. Para
34 of the said complaint and the prayers made are important,
which are set out herein below:
“4. That the complainant had already been submitted all the
relevant papers/forms with the opposite party, but illegally,
malafidely and without any right, title and interest, lingering the
matter on one pretext to the another while the complainant has
hired the services of the Opp. party by paying consideration of
the premium for insured amount of Rs.8,40,000/- and therefore,
the Opp. party has totally failed to render sufficient services to
the complainant.”
xxx xxx xxx
"a) Direct the opposite party to pay the insured amount of the
theft vehicle i.e Rs. 8,40,000/- along with interest @ 18% per
annum from the date of theft till realization.
b) Direct the opposite party to pay, a sum of Rs.20,000/- on
account of mental agony, delay, the harassment etc. suffered by
the complainant."
e) What is significant is that on the date of the complaint, the
Insurance Company had not repudiated the claim. It appears
from the record that the Insurance Company had appointed an
agency named “Delta Detectives” to investigate the matter and
the said agency, on 27.10.2008, had recommended repudiation of
the claim.
f) After the complaint CPA No. 515 of 2009 was lodged on
11.06.2009, it was only on 15.10.2009 that the respondent-
4Insurance Company issued a letter repudiating the claim. The
relevant portion of the repudiation letter reads as follows:-
“2. You, vide an intimation letter dt. 02.07.2008, informed, for
the first time, that your above said Dumper No. HR-55C-5385
had been stolen on 26.06.2008.
xxx xxx xxx
“5. That, thus, from the above facts as disclosed by you and your
driver, it is quite clear that the theft of your Dumper No. HR-55C-
5385 was totally the result of your and your driver Mam Chand's
total negligence in not safeguarding the said vehicle properly. It
is quite clear that had the said Dumper would not have been left
un-attended and further the key of the said Dumper would not
have been left inside the key hole of the said Dumper, then, the
same could not have been taken away by any person. In view of
above contraventions and violations of the terms and conditions
of the subject insurance policy, the Co. is not liable to pay any
claim in respect of the said Dumper. Therefore, the competent
authority of the Co. has repudiated your claim. It may please be
noted.”
g) When the matter stood thus, the complaint CPA No. 515 of
2009 came up before the District Forum on 22.11.2020 when the
following statement appears to have been recorded of the
advocate for the appellant, in CPA No. 515 of 2009:
“I, Surender Kumar Gulia, Advocate, state that I do not want to
proceed with my case. It may be dismissed.
Sd/- Sd/-
Surender Kumar Gulia, Adv. Member
RO & AC DCDRF, GGN”
5Recording the statement, separately, the District Forum on
22.11.2010 disposed of the said complaint in the following
terms:-
“Statement of the learned counsel for the complainant for
withdrawal of the complaint recorded, separately. In view of the
statement, the complaint of the complainant is hereby dismissed
as withdrawn. File be consigned to record room after due
compliance.”
h) Faced with the repudiation, which is dated 15.10.2009, the
Claimant, desperate to indemnify himself and get the fruits of his
insurance policy, filed a fresh complaint being C.C. No. 134 of
2012. In the said complaint, the appellant averred that, after
filing the earlier complaint, since the counsel for the opposite
party viz., the Insurance Company took numerous dates for
arguments on one pretext or the other, his counsel got annoyed
with the attitude of the said Advocate and, by mistake, withdrew
the case on 22.11.2020. It was expressly pleaded that the
withdrawal of the said complaint was unfortunate, and that the
appellant should not be made to suffer for the wrong deeds of the
counsel. In the complaint, the appellant prayed for a direction to
the Insurance Company to pay the insured an amount of
6Rs.8,40,000 with interest @ 18% p.a. and further prayed for an
amount of Rs.20,000/- on account of mental agony, delay and
harassment.
i) The Insurance Company, in its reply, objected to the
maintainability of the present complaint in view of the earlier
proceedings in CPA No. 515 of 2009. It also contended that the
terms and conditions of the insurance policy were violated. Apart
from this, the plea of limitation was also taken.
j) The objections were overruled by the District Forum. The
plea of the complaint, being barred by limitation, was addressed
by recording a finding that the delay, if any, was already
condoned, by the Forum, by order dated 06.03.2012 under
Section 24A of the Consumer Protection Act. The plea about
violation of the conditions of the policy was overruled and on
non-standard basis, a sum to the extent of 75% of the sum
assured was awarded. No finding was recorded on the aspect of
the bar in filing the present complaint after the order dated
22.11.2010 dismissing CPA No. 515 of 2009 as withdrawn. The
7Insurance Company carried the matter in Appeal to the State
Commission.
k) Before the State Commission, only two contentions were
urged. There was no contention raised on the issue of the
withdrawal of the earlier complaint. It was contended that the
intimation of the theft was given to the Insurance Company only
on 02.07.2008 i.e., six days after the theft, therefore it was argued
that Condition No.1 of the insurance policy was violated. Apart
from this, violation of Condition Nos. 5 of the policy was also
argued. Their point about the delay of six days in intimation was
brushed aside by referring to the Circular Ref: IRDA/ HLTH/
MISC/ CIR/ 216/ 09/ 2011 dated September 20th, 2011 issued by
Insurance Regulatory Development Authority (for short
“IRDA”), which stated that even if there was a condition in the
policy regarding delay in intimation, the insurer cannot take it's
shelter to repudiate the claim, which is otherwise proved to be
genuine.
8l) To appreciate the State Commission’s finding with regard
to violations of the conditions of the policy, it is necessary to
extract Condition Nos. 1 and 5 of the policy, which reads as
follows:
“l. Notice shall be given in writing to the Company immediately
upon the occurrence of any accidental loss or damage and in the
event of any claim and thereafter the insured shall give all such
information and assistance as the Company shall require. Every
letter claim writ summons and/or process or copy thereof shall
be forwarded to the Company immediately on receipt by the
insured. Notice shall also be given in writing to the Company
immediately the insured shall have knowledge of any
impending prosecution inquest or Fatal Inquiry in respect of any
occurrence which may give rise to a claim under this policy, in
case of theft or criminal act which may be the subject of a claim
under this Policy the insured shall give immediate notice to the
police and co-operate with the Company, in securing the
conviction of the offender.
xxx xxx xxx
5. The Insured shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard the
vehicle insured from loss or damage and to maintain it in
efficient condition and the Company shall have at all times free
and full access to examine the vehicle insured or any part
thereof or any driver or employee of the insured. In the event of
any accident or breakdown, the vehicle insured shall not be left
unattended without proper precautions being taken to prevent
further damage or loss and if the vehicle insured be driven
before the necessary repairs are effected, any extension of the
damage or any further damage to the vehicle shall be entirely at
the insured's own risk.”
m) The State Commission clearly recorded that, soon after the
theft of the vehicle on 26.06.2008, the FIR was lodged on
27.06.2008 with the Police and the Insurance Company was
9informed. It was also recorded that no cogent evidence was
produced by the Insurance Company to prove that there was a
delay of six days in giving intimation. Going further, the State
Commission recorded that Condition No.1 of the Insurance
policy applied only to occurrence of an accident and not to theft
cases. Insofar as Condition No.5 was concerned, it was held
relying on the judgments of this Court in National Insurance
Company Limited vs. Nitin Khandelwal, [(2008) 11 SCC 259]
and Amalendu Sahoo vs. Oriental Insurance Company
Limited, [(2010) 4 SCC 536] that even if there was a breach of
that clause, the claim could not have been repudiated in toto
and, applying the yardstick in Amalendu Sahoo (supra),
75% of the claim as the admissible amount, on non-standard
basis, was awarded. Holding thus, the State Commission
dismissed the Appeal of the Insurance Company.
n) Undaunted, the Insurance Company carried the matter in
revision to the National Commission. Here, it was primarily
argued that the withdrawal of Complaint No. 515 of 2009
foreclosed the Complainant from filing a fresh complaint. This
10plea was accepted relying on the bar under Order XXIII Rule (1)
(4) of the Code of Civil Procedure1(CPC). Further, dealing with
the merits about the breach of Condition No.5, the National
Commission found that Condition No.5 was breached because
the vehicle was unattended on the road side with keys in the key
hole. However, there was no further discussion on the
applicable law with regard to the consequences of the breach
and there is no whisper in the order of the National Commission
about the precedents discussed in the orders of the fora below.
Equally so, with regard to the argument on the breach of
Condition No.1, it was recorded that there was an obligation of
the claimant to give intimation in writing of the theft of the
vehicle. The National Commission, thus, allowed the Revision
Petition.
1 Withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of claim.- (1) At any time after the institution of
a suit, the plaintiff may as against all or any of the defendants abandon his suit or abandon
a part of his claim:
Provided that where the plaintiff is a minor or other person to whom the provisions
contained in Rules 1 to 14 of Order XXXII extend, neither the suit nor any part of the claim
shall be abandoned without the leave of the Court.
(4) Where the plaintiff-
(a) abandons any suit or part of claim under sub-rule(1), or
(b) withdraws from a suit or part of a claim without the permission referred to in sub-
rule (3),
he shall be liable for any such costs as the Court may award and shall be precluded
from instituting any fresh suit in respect of such subject-matter or such part of the claim.
114) We have heard Ms. Kunika, learned counsel for the
appellant, who presented the case very ably before us and Mr.
J.P. Sheokand, learned counsel for the respondent-Insurance
Company, who left no stone unturned while making his
submissions.
Withdrawal of the earlier complaint
5) At the very outset, we would like to record that, having
not argued, before the State Commission, the point of the
present complaint being barred in view of the withdrawal of the
earlier complaint, the National Commission was not justified, on
the facts of the present case, in allowing the respondent-
Insurance Company to urge that point therefrom. It is very clear
from the order of the State Commission that only two points
were argued by the Insurance Company.
6) Para 6 of the order of the State Commission is extracted
hereinbelow:-
“Learned counsel for the Appellant-Insurance Company has
assailed the order of the District Forum by raising two-fold
arguments. Firstly, that there was delay of 6 days in giving
intimation to the Insurance Company and secondly that the
12ignition key was left in the truck by driver and the truck was
left unattended on the road.”
7) In any event, we are convinced that interest of justice
requires that the appellant, in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of this case, should not be non-suited on the
ground that his earlier complaint was withdrawn. We say so for
the following reasons:-
(i) Firstly, the original Complaint No. 515 was filed on
11.06.2009 when the Insurance Company had not taken any
decision on the claim. In fact, the Complainant had alleged that
the Insurance Company was lingering on with the issue and had
complained of not rendering “sufficient service”;
(ii) Secondly, pending that complaint, it was on 15.10.2009
that the repudiation letter was issued on purported breach of
Condition Nos. 1 & 5 of the Policy;
(iii) Thirdly, we find that a separate proceeding has been drawn
up recording the statement of only the lawyer of the
Complainant. The statement of the lawyer stated that “I,
Surender Kumar Gulia, Advocate, state that I do not want to
proceed with my case. It may be dismissed”.
13(iv) Fourthly, in the complaint filed on 06.03.2012, the
appellant avers that since the lawyer for the opposite party –
Insurance Company was taking numerous dates for arguments,
his counsel getting annoyed with the attitude of the advocate of
the opposite party withdrew the above said case by mistake.
(v) Fifthly, the appellant further avers that the withdrawal was
unfortunate and he ought not to have prejudiced for the deeds of
his lawyer.
(vi) Sixthly, the finding of the National Commission is also
factually erroneous, on this score. The learned counsel for the
appellant drew our attention to para 9 of the order of the
National Commission wherein the following erroneous finding
was recorded.
“9. It is not disputed that earlier also, the complainant had
filed consumer complaint no. 515 of 2009 against the opposite
party/Insurance company on the same cause of action.
Perusal of record would show that aforesaid complaint filed
by the complainant in respect of repudiation of insurance
claim regarding the same theft was withdrawn by the
complainant unconditionally on 22.11.2010. Copy of the
relevant order in CC No. 515 of 2009 is on the record. The
order is reproduced as under:
"Statement of learned counsel for the complainant
for withdrawal of the complaint recorded separately.
In view of the statement, the complaint of the
14complainant is hereby dismissed as withdrawn. File
be consigned to record room after due compliance."
It will be noticed that the National Commission was under the
wrong impression that the original Complaint No. 515 of 2009
was filed in respect of repudiation of the insurance claim and it
proceeded on the erroneous premise that having challenged the
repudiation in Complaint No. 515, the withdrawal of the
complaint unconditionally on 22.11.2010 was fatal to the
appellant. The original Complaint No. 515 of 2009 was filed on
11.06.2009 and the respondent-Insurance Company repudiated
the claim only on 15.10.2009.
8) In view of the foregoing, it has to be reiterated that the
complaint No. 515 was filed after theft due to non-settlement of
claim by the Insurance Company. The repudiation of the claim
was made during the pendency of the said complaint,
purportedly due to breach of condition no. 1 and 5. The said
complaint was withdrawn by the advocate of the complainant on
the pretext of the case being prolonged by the advocate of the
Insurance Company, without having express instructions for
15withdrawal of the said complaint. However, for the fault of the
advocate, the complainant cannot be made to suffer. Finally, the
dismissal of the complaint was made by the National
Commission under the wrong pretext that the earlier complaint
had challenged the order of repudiation. Thus, in our view, the
complaint cannot be thrown out on the threshold of Order XXIII
Rule (1)(4) CPC and in the peculiar facts, it requires
consideration on merits.
In the facts of the present case, the main question that falls
for consideration is: Whether the delay of 6 days in intimating
the Insurance Company about the theft comes within the
purview of breach of Condition No. 1 and also whether on facts
there was breach of condition No. 5 of the insurance policy to
justify the rejection of the claim in toto?
9) A careful perusal of Condition No.1 shows that notice is to
be given in writing to the Insurance Company immediately upon
occurrence of any accidental loss or damage. The later part of
the clause says that in case of theft or criminal act, which may
16be subject of a claim under the policy, the insured shall give
immediate notice to the police and cooperate with the Insurance
Company in securing the conviction of the offender. In support
of this interpretation to Condition No.1 and to bolster her plea
that the appellant-Claimant did not breach Condition No.1,
learned counsel for the appellant relied on the recent judgment
of this Court in Jaina Construction Company vs. Oriental
Insurance Company Limited and Another, [(2022) 4 SCC
527], wherein relying on and reiterating the judgment of a three-
Judge Bench in Gurshinder Singh vs. Shriram General
Insurance Co. Ltd. [(2020) 11 SCC 612], this Court held as
follows:-
“10. At the outset, it may be noted that there being a conflict of
decisions of the Bench of two Judges of this Court in Om
Prakash v. Reliance General Insurance, [(2017) 9 SCC 724] and
in Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Parvesh Chander Chadha,
[(2018) 9 SCC 798], on the question as to whether the delay
occurred in informing the Insurance Company about the occurrence
of the theft of the vehicle, though the FIR was registered
immediately, would disentitle the claimant of the insurance claim,
the matter was referred to a three-Judge Bench.
11. The three-Judge Bench in Gurshinder Singh v. Shriram
General Insurance Co. Ltd., [(2020) 11 SCC 612] in similar case
as on hand, interpreted the very Condition 1 of the insurance
contract and observed as under : (SCC pp. 618-21, paras 9-15, 17
& 20)
17xxx xxx xxx
12. In our view, applying the aforesaid principles, Condition
1 of the standard form for commercial vehicles package
policy will have to be divided into two parts. The perusal of
the first part of Condition 1 would reveal that it provides that
“a notice shall be given in writing to the company
immediately upon the occurrence of any accidental loss or
damage”. It further provides that in the event of any claim
and thereafter, the insured shall give all such information and
assistance as the company shall require. It provides that every
letter, claim, writ, summons and/or process or copy thereof
shall be forwarded to the insurance company immediately on
receipt by the insured. It further provides that a notice shall
also be given in writing to the company immediately by the
insured if he shall have knowledge of any impending
prosecution inquest or fatal inquiry in respect of any
occurrence, which may give rise to a claim under this policy.
13. ***
14. We find that the second part of Condition 1 deals with the
‘theft or criminal act other than the accident’. It provides that
in case of theft or criminal act which may be the subject of a
claim under the policy, the insured shall give immediate
notice to the police and cooperate with the company in
securing the conviction of the offender. The object behind
giving immediate notice to the police appears to be that if the
police is immediately informed about the theft or any
criminal act, the police machinery can be set in motion and
steps for recovery of the vehicle could be expedited. In a case
of theft, the insurance company or a surveyor would have a
limited role. It is the police, who acting on the FIR of the
insured, will be required to take immediate steps for tracing
and recovering the vehicle. Per contra, the surveyor of the
insurance company, at the most, could ascertain the factum
regarding the theft of the vehicle.
15. It is further to be noted that, in the event, after the
registration of an FIR, the police successfully recovering the
vehicle and returning the same to the insured, there would be
no occasion to lodge a claim for compensation on account of
the policy. It is only when the police are not in a position to
trace and recover the vehicle and the final report is lodged by
the police after the vehicle is not traced, the insured would be
in a position to lodge his claim for compensation.
16. ***
1817. That the term “cooperate” as used under the contract
needs to be assessed in the facts and circumstances. While
assessing the “duty to cooperate” for the insured, inter alia,
the court should have regard to those breaches by the insured
which are prejudicial to the insurance company. Usually,
mere delay in informing the theft to the insurer, when the
same was already informed to the law enforcement
authorities, cannot amount to a breach of “duty to cooperate”
of the insured.
18.-19. ***
20. We, therefore, hold that when an insured has lodged the
FIR immediately after the theft of a vehicle occurred and
when the police after investigation have lodged a final report
after the vehicle was not traced and when the
surveyors/investigators appointed by the insurance company
have found the claim of the theft to be genuine, then mere
delay in intimating the insurance company about the
occurrence of the theft cannot be a ground to deny the claim
of the insured.”
12. In the opinion of the Court the aforestated ratio of the judgment
clinches the issue involved in the case on hand. In the instant case
also, the FIR was lodged immediately on the next day of the
occurrence of theft of the vehicle by the complainant. The accused
were also arrested and charge-sheeted, however, the vehicle could
not be traced out. Of course, it is true that there was a delay of
about five months on the part of the complainant in informing and
lodging its claim before the Insurance Company, nonetheless, it is
pertinent to note that the Insurance Company has not repudiated the
claim on the ground that it was not genuine. It has repudiated only
on the ground of delay. When the complainant had lodged the FIR
immediately after the theft of the vehicle, and when the police after
the investigation had arrested the accused and also filed challan
before the court concerned, and when the claim of the insured was
not found to be not genuine, the Insurance Company could not have
repudiated the claim merely on the ground that there was a delay in
intimating the Insurance Company about the occurrence of the
theft.”
10) The above judgments put the matter and the controversy to
rest. There was no breach of Condition No.1 in the present case.
19In the present case, after the incident of theft on 26.06.2008, FIR
was registered on 27.06.2008. The intimation was also given to
the Insurance Company admittedly on 02.07.2008. The Police
have also reported the vehicle as untraced as the records
indicate.
11) Insofar as the alleged breach of Condition No.5 is
concerned, it is seen from the record that the driver of the
claimant left the key in the keyhole of the vehicle when he got
down to search the location of “Mittal Farm”, where he had to
unload the stone dust. The investigator recommended the
repudiation of claim because, according to him, steps to
safeguard the vehicle insured were not taken by the driver. It is
contended by the appellant that breach of condition No.5, if any,
cannot result in total repudiation of the claim. It is argued that
the claim ought to be settled on non-standard basis, as was
ordered by the District Forum and the State Commission.
Reliance is placed on Nitin Khandelwal (supra) and Amalendu
Sahoo (supra).
2012) The learned Counsel for the Insurance-Company
vehemently opposed these submissions and prayed for dismissal
of the Appeal. It is argued by him that, while in Nitin
Khandelwal (supra) and in Amalendu Sahoo (supra) the cause
of repudiation was not germane to the theft, in the present case,
the cause was germane to the theft. The learned Counsel
supported the findings as recorded in the order impugned.
13) A reading of the facts of the case in Nitin Khandelwal
(supra), reveal that the repudiation was on the ground that the
vehicle was being used as a taxi and in Amalendu Sahoo
(supra), it was on the ground that the vehicle was being used on
hire. In our view, that would not make any difference to the ratio
that is deducible from those judgments.
14) It is well settled in a long line of judgments of this Court
that any violation of the condition should be in the nature of a
fundamental breach so as to deny the claimant any amount. [see
Manjeet Singh vs. National Insurance Company Limited and
Another, [(2018) 2 SCC 108]; B.V. Nagaraju vs. Oriental
21Insurance Co. Ltd., Divisional Officer, Hassan, [(1996) 4 SCC
647], National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Swaran Singh and
Others, [(2004) 3 SCC 297] and Lakhmi Chand vs. Reliance
General Insurance, [(2016) 3 SCC 100] ]
15) It is an admitted position in the Repudiation Letter and the
Survey Report that the theft did happen. What is alleged is that
the Claimant was negligent in leaving the vehicle unattended
with the key in the ignition. Theft is defined in Section 378 of
the IPC as follows:-
“378. Theft.—Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any
moveable property out of the possession of any person without
that person’s consent, moves that property in order to such
taking, is said to commit theft.”
As will be seen from the definition, theft occurs when any person
intended to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the
possession of any person without that person’s consent, moves
that property in order to such taking. It is not the case of the
Insurance Company that the Claimant consented or connived in
the removal of the vehicle, in which event that would not be
theft, in the eye of law. Could it be said, as is said in the
repudiation letter, that the theft of the vehicle was totally the
22result of driver Mam Chand leaving the vehicle unattended with
the key in the ignition? On the facts of this case, the answer has
to be in the negative. It is noticed in the repudiation letter that
the driver Mam Chand had, after alighting from the vehicle, gone
to enquire about the location of Mittal’s Farm and that after he
went some distance, he heard the sound of the starting of the
vehicle and it being stolen away. The time gap between the
driver alighting from the vehicle and noticing the theft, is very
short as is clear from the facts of the case. It cannot be said, in
such circumstances, that leaving the key of the vehicle in the
ignition was an open invitation to steal the vehicle.
16) The Court of Appeal in England, in the case of David
Topp vs. London Country Bus (South West) Limited, [1993]
EWCA Civ 15 had occasion to consider the issue, though in the
context of liability of the owner of the vehicle for a fatal
accident. The facts as set out in the judgment are as follows:-
“In accordance with usual practice, the driver, Mr. Green, left
the bus in that lay-by at the bus stop at about 2.35 p.m. on 24th
April 1988. He left it unlocked, with the ignition key in it. He
had then a 40 minute rest period before resuming his duties,
driving a different bus. There was an arrangement under
which the drivers could spend their rest period in the hospital.
23The expectation was that another driver, about eight minutes
after Mr. Green had left the bus in the lay-by, would pick the
bus up and drive the same route. But the other driver, who
should have picked the bus up at about 2.43 p.m., did not do so
because he was feeling unwell. His shift would have been
non-compulsory overtime, and he did not report for his
overtime. The bus therefore remained in the lay-by. Mr.
Green saw it there later and reported that it was still standing
there. Therefore, there is no doubt that the depot knew that the
bus was there. But, possibly because of shortage of drivers or
available staff, nothing was done to pick the bus up that
evening. It was taken by somebody who has never been traced
just before 11.15 at night, driven for a relatively short distance
until the point where Mrs. Topp was knocked down and killed,
and it was abandoned round the corner from there.”
Referring to the judgment of Lord Justice Robert Goff in P.Perl
(Exporters) Ltd. vs. Camden London Borough Council [1984]
QB 342, the Court of Appeal held as under:-
“In so far as the case is put on the basis that to leave the bus
unlocked and with the key in the ignition on the Highway near a
public house is to create a special risk in a special category, it is
pertinent to refer to a passage in the judgment of Lord Justice
Robert Goff (as he then was) in P. Perl (Exporters) Ltd. V.
Camden London Borough Council [1984] QB 342 at page 359E-F
where he said:
“In particular, I have in mind certain cases where the
defendant presents the wrongdoer with the means to
commit the wrong, in circumstances where it is obvious or
very likely that he will do so – as, for example, where he
hands over a car to be driven by a person who is drunk, or
plainly incompetent, who then runs over the plaintiff…”
But the sort of cases to which Lord Justice Robert Goff was there
referring are far different from the present case. It may be added
that that there is no evidence that the malefactor had been
frequenting the public house that is shown in the picture; we do
not know who he was, nor is there any evidence or presumption
that persons who do frequent that particular public house are
particularly likely to steal vehicles and engage in joy-riding.”
(underlining is ours)
24The above reasoning appeals to us to conclude that the present
case was an eminently fit case, where the claim at 75% ought to
have been awarded on a non-standard basis. Even if there was
some carelessness, on the peculiar facts of this case, it was not a
fundamental breach of Condition No.5 warranting total
repudiation. It was rightly so ordered by the District Forum
and affirmed by the State Commission.
17) Learned counsel for the Insurance Company, in his written
submissions, has placed before us an unreported order dated
29.03.2022 passed by this Court in SLP (C) No. 6518 of 2018
titled Kanwarjit Singh Kang vs. M/s ICICI Lombard General
Insurance Co. Ltd. & Anr. to support his case on the breach of
Condition No.5.
We have carefully perused the order. In the said order, it
is recorded that concurrently the Claimant lost before the fora
below and it is also recorded that the State Commission did not
find the ground of leaving the ignition keys in the vehicle to be a
valid reason to repudiate the claim. However, on the ground of
25unexplained and inordinate delay in lodging the FIR, the
repudiation was upheld. In that case, while the loss was on
25.03.2010, the intimation to Police was only on 02.04.2010 so
clearly it was a breach of Condition No.1. No doubt, in the
penultimate paragraph of the order it is recorded that the want of
reasonable care on the part of the petitioner in that case operated
heavily against the petitioner and it was concluded that the
repudiation could not be faulted. However, the primary reason
for repudiation was the violation of condition No.1 viz. the delay
in intimation to the Police. Further since there was a
fundamental breach of Condition No.1, there was no occasion to
raise points for settlement of claim on non-standard basis. There
is no whisper about the breach of Condition No.5 being not a
fundamental breach. We find the present case, on facts,
completely different as there is no breach of Condition No.1
because the intimation to the police was immediate. There have
been concurrent awards by the District Forum and State
Commission on non-standard basis by applying Nitin
26Khandelwal (supra) and Amalendu Sahoo (supra). Hence, the
order will in no manner assist the respondent-Company.
18) In Amalendu Sahoo (supra), this Court noticed the
guidelines issued by the New India Assurance Co. Ltd. in
settling claims on non-standard basis. The guidelines read as
under:-
Sl.No. Description Percentage of settlement
(i) Under declaration of licensed Deduct 3 years’ difference in
carrying capacity. premium from the amount of
claim or deduct 25% of claim
amount, whichever is higher.
(ii) Overloading of vehicles beyond Pay claims not exceeding 75% of
licensed carrying capacity. admissible claim.
(iii) Any other breach of Pay up to 75% of admissible
warranty/condition of policy claim.”
including limitation as to use.
The above guidelines were followed by this Court in Amalendu
Sahoo (supra) as is clear from para 14 of the said judgment.
The District Forum and the State Commission have rightly
applied Amalendu Sahoo (supra) to the facts of the present case
and awarded 75% on non-standard basis.
19) Nitin Khandelwal (supra) and Amalendu Sahoo (supra)
lay down the correct formula that where there is some
27contributory factor, a proportionate deduction from the assured
amount would be all that the Insurance Company can aspire to
deduct. We are inclined to accept the plea of the appellant that in
the case at hand, on the facts governing the scenario, Clause (iii)
of the table set out in para 14 of Amalendu Sahoo (supra) is
attracted and the District Forum and the State Commission were
justified in awarding the entire 75% of the admissible claim.
20) For the aforesaid reasons, the Appeal is allowed. We set
aside the judgment of the National Commission and restore that
of the District Forum as affirmed by the State Commission. No
order as to costs.
…..…………………J.
(J.K. Maheshwari)
…..…………………J.
(K.V. Viswanathan)
New Delhi;
July 31, 2023.
28