public tap. As there was no supply of water in the said tap at the relevant point of time,
Nianaben went to the house original accused No. 3, which was situated in the
neighbourhood of her house, to fetch the same. While Nainaben was fetching water,
original accused Nos. 1,2 and 3 and some other persons began to tease Nainaben.
Therefore, Nainaben returned to her house.
After returning to her house, Nainaben informed about the said incident to her
father deceased Bhamarji. As a result thereof, the deceased-Bhamraji went to the house
of original accused No. 3 and warned them not to repeat such thing in future. Thereafter,
the deceased left the house of original accused No. 3.
Sometime later, all the four accused persons went to the house of deceased-
Bhamraji and during that time, original accused No. 1 was having a “Rampuri” -knife,
original accused No. 4 was having a stick while the two other accused persons, i.e. original
accused Nos. 2 and 3, were unarmed. Original accused Nos. 2 and 3 caught hold of the
deceased while original accused No. 1, who was having a knife, inflicted knife blows on the
right hand side region of the abdomen as also the thigh region of the deceased. As a result
thereof, the deceased fell down and all the accused persons fled the scene of offence.
Thereafter, the deceased was taken to Sardarnagar Police Station in an Auto-
rickshaaw. At that time, the P.S.I. of Sardarnagar Police Station, Kanaksing Bhulabhai
Rathod, advised that the deceased be taken to the Civil Hospital, Ahmedabad for
-3-
necessary treatment. Accordingly, the deceased was taken to Civil Hospital, Ahmedabad,
where he was given necessary treatment.
On the basis of information given case was registered for offence punishable
under Section 326 read with Section 34 IPC. Subsequently the dying declaration of the
deceased was sought to be recorded. But before the dying declaration could be recordedthe deceased succumbed to injuries on 27.10.1997. Therefore Section 302 IPC was added
to the complaint. After investigation, charge sheet was filed. Since the accused persons
abjurd guilt, trial was held. The trial court believed the evidence placed on record and
convicted the accused nos. 1, 2 and 3 while directed acquittal of accused No. 4. As noted
above three appeals were filed before the High Court.
The High Court dismissed all the appeals. When the matter was placed for
grant of leave to file appeal, the petition was dismissed qua Chandan singh accused No. 1.
Therefore present appeal relates to other two accused persons. Learned counsel for the
appellants submitted that A 2 was not armed. It is therefore submitted that the appellant
cannot be held guilty of offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC.
Learned counsel for the State on the other supported the judgment.
The basic question arises for consideration is whether Section 34 can be
applied so far as the appellants are concerned.
-4-
The factual scenario as noted above goes to show that the appellant cannot be
attributed any common intention to cause the murder of the deceased. In order to bring a
case under Section 34 it is not necessary that there must be a prior conspiracy or pre-
meditation. The common intention can be formed in the course of occurrence. To apply
Section 34 apart from the fact that there should be two or more accused, two factors must
be established :(i) common intention and (ii) participation of accused in the commission of
an offence. If common intention is proved but no overt act is attributed to the individual
accused, section 34 will be attracted as essentially it involves vicarious liability. But if
participation of the accused in the crime is proved and common intention is absent, section
34 cannot be invoked. (See Jai Bhagwan VS. State of Haryana, AIR 1999 SC 1083).
In the background facts, the appropriate conviction would be Section 326 readwith Section 34 IPC. Custodial sentence of three years would meet the ends of justice.
The appeal is allowed with the above observation.
.....................J.
(Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)
.....................J.
(Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
New Delhi,
December 5, 2008.