http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 7
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 87 of 2004
PETITIONER:
Chacko alias Aniyan Kunju & Ors.
RESPONDENT:
State of Kerala
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 21/01/2004
BENCH:
DORAISWAMY RAJU & ARIJIT PASAYAT
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 3634/2003)
ARIJIT PASAYAT,J.
Leave granted.
The four appellants faced trial for allegedly having
caused homicidal death of one Kuttappan (hereinafter
referred to as ’the deceased’) on 16.6.1994. They were tried
for commission of offence punishable under Section 302 read
with Section 34 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short ’the
IPC’). The learned Sessions Judge, Kottayam, found all the
four accused persons guilty and convicted and sentenced them
for the offence punishable under Section 302 read with
Section 34 IPC and sentenced each of them to undergo
imprisonment for life. Fine of Rs.10,000/- with default
stipulation was also imposed. The accused-appellants
unsuccessfully challenged their conviction and sentence
before the Kerala High Court which dismissed the same by the
impugned judgment.
Prosecution version as unfolded during trial is as
follows:
There was previous enmity between accused persons and
the deceased. In furtherance of their common intention
because of such enmity, the accused persons chased and
assaulted the deceased on 16.6.1994 at about 11 p.m. A-2
beat the deceased with an iron rod on his back and when
deceased ran away to save his life, all the accused persons
chased him and near a road side junction, A-4 lighted the
torch carried by him which enabled the other accused persons
to beat the deceased with handles of axe and spade, and iron
rod on different parts of the body. The injuries were
caused mostly on the hands, legs and ribs. Only one injury
was inflicted on the head which was the fatal injury.
Though the deceased was taken to the hospital he breathed
his last at about 2.25 a.m. on 17.6.1994. 10 witnesses were
examined to further the prosecution version. Rajan (PW-2)
was said to be an eyewitness. The information was lodged
with the police by Anil Kumar (PW-1). Soman (PW-3) was the
brother-in-law of the deceased who was informed about the
quarrel between deceased and the accused persons. The
deceased allegedly made a dying declaration before themhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 7
implicating the accused persons. The accused persons pleaded
innocence. They pleaded that the actual occurrence was
suppressed by the prosecution and, in fact, the deceased
attacked them and caused injuries on A-1 and A-2. Since the
accused persons were attacked, they exercised their right of
private defence and tried to protect themselves and if on
account of that the deceased sustained injuries there was no
offence involved. Trial Court after analyzing the evidence
on record came to hold that the plea of right of private
defence was not established. A-1 to A-4 were the authors of
the crime. It also did not accept the contention of A-4 that
no overt act was attributed to him and there was no material
to bring him within the field of Section 34 IPC. The Trial
court held that evidence of PW-2 inspire confidence. He was
a reliable witness and on his evidence alone the conviction
has to be recorded, though additionally the dying
declaration was there.
In appeal, the Kerala High Court held that merely
because the accused persons have sustained some injuries,
that cannot ipso facto be a ground for throwing out the
prosecution case. Non-explanation of injuries on the accused
persons in all cases is not a ground for discarding the
prosecution version. It also did not find any substance in
the plea of the accused-appellants that on the basis of
solitary witness’s evidence conviction cannot be recorded.
Finally, the plea that offence under Section 302 read with
Section 34 IPC was not made out did not find acceptance by
the High Court. It also did not accept the plea that there
was no material for applying Section 34 to A-4. It was
noticed that he was the person who focused the light on the
deceased, facilitating the assaults.
In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the
appellant submitted that the Trial Court and the High Court
have lost sight of relevant factors. The prosecution
version itself indicated that there was quarrel between the
deceased and the accused and since the assaults allegedly
took place in course of a sudden quarrel, that too in
exercise of right of private defence, the accused persons
should not have been found guilty. It was pointed out that
the prosecution version primarily stands on the solitary
evidence of PW-2. The occurrence, according to the
prosecution took place late in the night and it was
completely dark and necessitated focusing of torch by A-4.
These materials adduced by the prosecution go to show that
no particular injury was intended. In fact, the post-mortem
shows that injuries were on non-vital parts of the body.
The reference to these aspects was highlighted to
substantiate the plea that Section 302 has not attracted.
Alternatively, it is submitted that no offence under Section
34 IPC is made out and so far as accused A-4 is concerned,
as admittedly no assault was done by him and, therefore, he
should not have been convicted.
Per contra, learned counsel for the State submitted
that the Trial Court and the High Court have given adequate
reasons for finding the accused persons guilty and
sentencing them. As they have analysed the factual position
in great detail and have come to the conclusion regarding
guilt of the accused, there is no scope for any
interference. According to him the case is squarely covered
by Section 302 IPC.
Coming to the question whether on the basis of ahttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 7
solitary evidence conviction can be maintained. A bare
reference of Section 134 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(in short ’the Evidence Act’) would suffice. The provision
clearly states that no particular number of witnesses is
required to establish the case. Conviction can be based on
the testimony of single witness if he is wholly reliable.
Corroboration may be necessary when he is only partially
reliable. If the evidence is unblemished and beyond all
possible criticism and the Court is satisfied that the
witness was speaking the truth then on his evidence alone
conviction can be maintained. Undisputedly, there were
injuries found on the body of the accused persons on medical
evidence. That per se cannot be a ground to totally discard
the prosecution version. This is a factor which has to be
weighed along with other materials to see whether the
prosecution version is reliable, cogent and trustworthy.
When the case of the prosecution is supported by an
eyewitness who is found to be truthful, as well, mere non-
explanation of the injuries on the accused persons cannot be
a foundation for discarding the prosecution version.
Additionally, the dying declaration was found to be
acceptable.
Other plea emphasized related to alleged exercise of
right of private defence. Merely because there was a quarrel
and two accused persons sustained injuries, that does not
confer a right of private defence extending to the extent of
causing death as in this case. Though such right cannot be
weighed in golden scales, it has to be established that the
accused persons were under such grave apprehension about the
safety of their life and property that retaliation to the
extent done was absolutely necessary. No evidence much less
cogent and credible was adduced in this regard. The right of
private defence as claimed by the accused persons have been
rightly discarded.
This brings us to the crucial question as to which was
the appropriate provision to be applied. In the scheme of
IPC culpable homicide is the genus and "murder", its specie.
All "murder" is "culpable homicide" but not vice versa.
Speaking generally, "culpable homicide" sans "special
characteristics of murder is culpable homicide not amounting
to murder". For the purpose of fixing punishment,
proportionate to the gravity of the generic offence, IPC
practically recognizes three degrees of culpable homicide.
The first is, what may be called, "culpable homicide of the
first degree". This is the gravest form of culpable
homicide, which is defined in Section 300 as "murder". The
second may be termed as "culpable homicide of the second
degree". This is punishable under the first part of Section
304. Then, there is "culpable homicide of the third degree".
This is the lowest type of culpable homicide and the
punishment provided for it is also the lowest among the
punishments provided for the three grades. Culpable homicide
of this degree is punishable under the second part of
Section 304.
The academic distinction between "murder" and "culpable
homicide not amounting to murder" has always vexed the
courts. The confusion is caused, if courts losing sight of
the true scope and meaning of the terms used by the
legislature in these sections, allow themselves to be drawn
into minute abstractions. The safest way of approach to the
interpretation and application of these provisions seems to
be to keep in focus the keywords used in the various clauses
of Sections 299 and 300. The following comparative table
will be helpful in appreciating the points of distinctionhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 7
between the two offences :
Section 299 Section 300
A person commits Subject to certain exceptions
culpable homicide if the act by culpable homicide is murder if the
the death is caused is act by which the death is caused
done - is done -
INTENTION
(a) with the intention of causing (1) with the intention of causing
death; or death; or
(b) with the intention (2) with the intention of causing
of causing such such bodily injury as the
bodily injury as is offender knows to be likely to
likely to cause death; or cause the death of the person
to whom the harm is caused; or
(3)With the intention of causing
bodily injury to any person
and the bodily injury intended
to be inflicted is sufficient
in the ordinary course of
nature to cause death; or
KNOWLEDGE
(c) with the (4) with the knowledge that the
knowledge that act is so imminently
the act is likely to dangerous that it must in all
cause death. probability cause death or
such bodily injury as is likely
to cause death, and commits
such act without any
excuse for incurring the
risk of causing death
or such injury as is mentioned above.
Clause (b) of Section 299 corresponds with clauses (2)
and (3) of Section 300. The distinguishing feature of the
mens rea requisite under clause (2) is the knowledge
possessed by the offender regarding the particular victim
being in such a peculiar condition or state of health that
the internal harm caused to him is likely to be fatal,
notwithstanding the fact that such harm would not in the
ordinary way of nature be sufficient to cause death of a
person in normal health or condition. It is noteworthy that
the "intention to cause death" is not an essential
requirement of clause (2). Only the intention of causing the
bodily injury coupled with the offender’s knowledge of the
likelihood of such injury causing the death of the
particular victim, is sufficient to bring the killing within
the ambit of this clause. This aspect of clause (2) is borne
out by Illustration (b) appended to Section 300.
Clause (b) of Section 299 does not postulate any such
knowledge on the part of the offender. Instances of cases
falling under clause (2) of Section 300 can be where the
assailant causes death by a fist-blow intentionally given
knowing that the victim is suffering from an enlarged liver,
or enlarged spleen or diseased heart and such blow is likely
to cause death of that particular person as a result of the
rupture of the liver, or spleen or the failure of the heart,
as the case may be. If the assailant had no such knowledge
about the disease or special frailty of the victim, nor an
intention to cause death or bodily injury sufficient in the
ordinary course of nature to cause death, the offence will
not be murder, even if the injury which caused the death,http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 7
was intentionally given. In clause (3) of Section 300,
instead of the words "likely to cause death" occurring in
the corresponding clause (b) of Section 299, the words
"sufficient in the ordinary course of nature" have been
used. Obviously, the distinction lies between a bodily
injury likely to cause death and a bodily injury sufficient
in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. The
distinction is fine but real and if overlooked, may result
in miscarriage of justice. The difference between clause (b)
of Section 299 and clause (3) of Section 300 is one of
degree of probability of death resulting from the intended
bodily injury. To put it more broadly, it is the degree of
probability of death which determines whether a culpable
homicide is of the gravest, medium or the lowest degree. The
word "likely" in clause (b) of Section 299 conveys the sense
of probability as distinguished from a mere possibility. The
words "bodily injury ... sufficient in the ordinary course
of nature to cause death" mean that death will be the "most
probable" result of the injury, having regard to the
ordinary course of nature.
For cases to fall within clause (3), it is not
necessary that the offender intended to cause death, so long
as the death ensues from the intentional bodily injury or
injuries sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of
nature. Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala (AIR 1966 SC 1874)
is an apt illustration of this point.
In Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab (AIR 1958 SC 465)
Vivian Bose, J. speaking for the Court, explained the
meaning and scope of clause (3). It was observed that the
prosecution must prove the following facts before it can
bring a case under Section 300 "thirdly". First, it must
establish quite objectively, that a bodily injury is
present; secondly, the nature of the injury must be proved.
These are purely objective investigations. Thirdly, it must
be proved that there was an intention to inflict that
particular injury, that is to say, that it was not
accidental or unintentional or that some other kind of
injury was intended. Once these three elements are proved to
be present, the enquiry proceeds further, and fourthly, it
must be proved that the injury of the type just described
made up of the three elements set out above was sufficient
to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. This part
of the enquiry is purely objective and inferential and has
nothing to do with the intention of the offender.
The ingredients of clause "thirdly" of Section 300 IPC
were brought out by the illustrious Judge in his terse
language as follows :
"12. To put it shortly, the prosecution must
prove the following facts before it can
bring a case under Section 300 ’thirdly’;
First, it must establish, quite objectively,
that a bodily injury is present;
Secondly, the nature of the injury must be
proved; These are purely objective
investigations.
Thirdly, it must be proved that there was an
intention to inflict that particular bodily
injury, that is to say, that it was not
accidental or unintentional, or that some
other kind of injury was intended.
Once these three elements are proved to be
present, the enquiry proceeds further and,
Fourthly, it must be proved that the injury
of the type just described made up of the
three elements set out above is sufficienthttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 6 of 7
to cause death in the ordinary course of
nature. This part of the enquiry is purely
objective and inferential and has nothing to
do with the intention of the offender."
The learned Judge explained the third ingredient in the
following words (at page 468):
"The question is not whether the prisoner
intended to inflict a serious injury or a
trivial one but whether he intended to
inflict the injury that is proved to be
present. If he can show that he did not, or
if the totality of the circumstances justify
such an inference, then, of course, the
intent that the section requires is not
proved. But if there is nothing beyond the
injury and the fact that the appellant
inflicted it, the only possible inference is
that he intended to inflict it. Whether he
knew of its seriousness, or intended serious
consequences, is neither here nor there. The
question, so far as the intention is
concerned, is not whether he intended to
kill, or to inflict an injury of a
particular degree of seriousness, but
whether he intended to inflict the injury in
question; and once the existence of the
injury is proved the intention to cause it
will be presumed unless the evidence or the
circumstances warrant an opposite
conclusion."
These observations of Vivian Bose, J. have become locus
classicus. The test laid down by Virsa Singh case (supra)
for the applicability of clause "thirdly" is now ingrained
in our legal system and has become part of the rule of law.
Under clause thirdly of Section 300 IPC, culpable homicide
is murder, if both the following conditions are satisfied
i.e. (a) that the act which causes death is done with the
intention of causing death or is done with the intention of
causing a bodily injury; and (b) that the injury intended to
be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature
to cause death. It must be proved that there was an
intention to inflict that particular bodily injury which, in
the ordinary course of nature, was sufficient to cause death
viz. that the injury found to be present was the injury that
was intended to be inflicted.
Thus, according to the rule laid down in Virsa Singh
case (supra) even if the intention of the accused was
limited to the infliction of a bodily injury sufficient to
cause death in the ordinary course of nature, and did not
extend to the intention of causing death, the offence would
be murder. Illustration (c) appended to Section 300 clearly
brings out this point.
Clause (c) of Section 299 and clause (4) of Section 300
both require knowledge of the probability of the act causing
death. It is not necessary for the purpose of this case to
dilate much on the distinction between these corresponding
clauses. It will be sufficient to say that clause (4) of
Section 300 would be applicable where the knowledge of the
offender as to the probability of death of a person or
persons in general as distinguished from a particular person
or persons - being caused from his imminently dangerous act,
approximates to a practical certainty. Such knowledge on the
part of the offender must be of the highest degree ofhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 7 of 7
probability, the act having been committed by the offender
without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death
or such injury as aforesaid.
The above are only broad guidelines and not cast-iron
imperatives. In most cases, their observance will facilitate
the task of the court. But sometimes the facts are so
intertwined and the second and the third stages so
telescoped into each, that it may not be convenient to give
a separate and clear cut treatment to the matters involved
in the second and third stages.
The position was illuminatingly highlighted by this
Court in State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu Punnayya (1976 (4) SCC
382 and Abdul Waheed Khan alias Waheed and ors. v. State of
A.P. (2002 (7) SCC 175).
The factual scenario goes to show that late at night in
a stage of complete darkness, the occurrence took place.
According to the prosecution itself for visibility A-4 used
the torch and focused the light on the deceased so that the
other accused persons could assault him. The distance from
which the light was focused is also not very small. It was
no doubt possible on the part of the accused persons to
place the deceased and assault him; but taking into account
the fact that almost all the injuries were on non-vital
parts and only one was on head, it cannot be definitely said
that any particular injury was intended. As noticed by
Courts below weapons used were not of considerable weight or
length. They axe or spade was not used but their handles of
small length and weight were used. Taking the totality of
the evidence into consideration and the special features
noticed, it would be appropriate to convict the accused
persons under Section 304 Part I read with Section 34 IPC
instead of Section 302 IPC. A-4 has been rightly roped in
under Section 34. He accompanied the accused persons, and
actively facilitated the assaults to be effectively made on
the accused by focusing the torch. His conduct prior and
subsequent to the occurrence clearly shows that he shared
the common intention so far as the assaults on the deceased
is concerned. Custodial sentence of 10 years would meet the
ends of justice. The appeal is partly allowed to the extent
indicated.