http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 16
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 330 of 2006
PETITIONER:
SANKARAN MOITRA
RESPONDENT:
SMT. SADHNA DAS & ANR.
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 24/03/2006
BENCH:
C.K. THAKKER
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
ARISING OUT OF
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) No. 3347 of 2003
C.K. THAKKER, J.
Leave granted.
I have had the benefit of going through the judgment
prepared by my learned brother P.K. Balasubramanyan, J. I
express my inability to agree with the reasons recorded and
conclusions arrived at by him. I, therefore, consider it
appropriate to deal with the matter independently.
The relevant facts as stated in the judgment of the
High Court of Calcutta impugned in the present appeal are
that on May 10, 2001 general election of the State
Assembly of the West Bengal was held. One Rabindra Nath
Das @ Topi Das (’deceased’ for short), husband of Mrs.
Sadhna Das (’complainant’ for short) was supporting a
particular political party. He was engaged in distributing
food packets to the polling agents at Subhas Sarobar
(Baliaghata Lake) constituency. It was the case of the
complainant that when her husband left the home on May
10, 2001, he stated that he would be coming for taking
lunch. According to the complainant, however, her husband
did not come. When she was returning after casting her
vote, she saw a Tata Sumo vehicle and one Anath Das of
the locality inside the vehicle. When she asked the people
who gathered over there as to what had happened, she was
informed that Topi Das had become unconscious due to
beating by police on his head and he was taken to hospital.
The complainant, therefore, immediately proceeded to
hospital. She found her younger brother-in-law Laxman Das
amongst the crowd. On being asked, she was told that her
husband had died. She learnt that her husband was
supplying food packets at the polling booth. At that time,
some police officers came there and they beat her husband.
When her husband left the place, police men chased him
towards the lake side. Her husband was not knowing
swimming and he stated to the police personnel that he did
not know swimming and requested them not to beat him.
But the police officers did not pay any heed to the request
and continued beating. The husband of the complainant fell
down, became unconscious, was taken to the hospital but
was declared dead there. She, therefore, informed the
Deputy Commissioner of Police on May 11, 2001 that her
husband was beaten to death by police and demanded
"stern punishment" to persons responsible for killing him.http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 16
On the next day, i.e. on May 12, 2001, the Deputy
Commissioner of Police, registered Phoolbagan P.S. Case
No.112, for an offence punishable under Section 304 Indian
Penal Code (IPC) against unknown police officers. It
appears that for a considerable long period, nothing was
done in the matter and no action was taken on the basis of
complaint made by the complainant. She, therefore, filed a
private complaint in the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Alipore, Kolkata on May 28, 2001 being case No.C-1107 of
2001 against the appellant and two other police officers for
offences punishable under Sections 302, 201, 109 and
120B of IPC. It was stated in the said complaint that the
husband of the complainant was assaulted and severely
beaten by police personnel which resulted in his death and
thereby the accused had committed the offences as
mentioned in the complaint and prayed for taking
cognizance, to issue process against the accused and to
pass appropriate orders in accordance with law. She had
also submitted a list of witnesses.
Between May 31, and June 16, 2001, the learned
Magistrate, following the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as ’the Code’)
recorded statements of the complainant and the witnesses
produced by her. On the basis of the said material, the
learned Magistrate took cognizance of the offences. On
June 16, 2001, the learned Magistrate issued non-bailable
warrant against the accused persons including the appellant
herein and fixed July 10, 2001 as returnable date.
Meanwhile, on June 30, 2001, the accused preferred an
application under Section 210 of the Code stating therein
that a complaint was filed by the complainant on May 12,
2001 which had been registered as PS Case No.112 of 2001
for an offence punishable under Section 304 IPC by
Phoolbagan Police Station and proceedings were initiated.
It was also stated that thereafter Fax-message was sent to
the Joint Commissioner of Police to investigate the case
under Section 302 which was treated as FIR. It was,
therefore, prayed that the complaint dated May 28, 2001
be stayed.
It may also be stated that the accused moved the
High Court for grant of anticipatory bail under Section 438
of the Code. The application, however, was rejected by the
High Court on June 20, 2003. The order passed by the High
Court was challenged by filing Special Leave Petition in this
Court which was also dismissed by this Court on July 28,
2003.
The accused then filed a petition under Section 482 of
the Code for quashing of proceedings, inter alia, contending
that the alleged offence had been committed by them
"while acting or purporting to act" in the discharge of their
official duties and no cognizance could be taken by the
Court except with the previous sanction of the State
Government. Since no such sanction was obtained before
filing the complaint, the complaint was not maintainable at
law and was liable to be dismissed only on that ground.
The High Court, by the impugned order, dismissed the
petition observing that it was a case of ’merciless beating’
by police officer causing death of a person which could not
be said to be an act in the discharge of official duty.
Several injuries were found on the person of the deceased
and according to the medical opinion, those injuries were
ante mortem and homicidal in nature. The postmortem
report clearly indicated the nature and extent of the injuries
inflicted by the accused on the victim and the witnesses
had given vivid description of the offence committed by thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 16
accused. In the facts and circumstances, therefore, it could
not be said to be a case covered by Section 197 of the
Code and hence the application was liable to be dismissed.
Accordingly, the application was dismissed on July 7, 2003.
The said order is challenged by the appellant.
On August 22, 2003, notice was issued and "stay of
further proceedings pending before the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Alipore, Calcutta" was granted by this Court in
the meanwhile. Affidavits and counter affidavits were
thereafter filed.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Mr. K.T.S. Tulsi, Senior Advocate, appearing for the
appellant, contended that the High Court has committed an
error of law in holding that the provisions of Section 197 of
the Code were not attracted. According to him, the
appellant was a police officer and he was on duty on May
10, 2001. At about 2 p.m., a message was received from
Assistant Commissioner of Police regarding disturbance and
rioting between two rival political parties at Subhash
Sarobar and the case was registered as Case No. 111 of
2001 for offences punishable under Sections 148, 149 and
336 IPC read with Sections 3 & 5 of Explosive Substances
Act, 1908 against the deceased and others and
investigation started. The appellant, along with other police
officers, rushed to the spot in order to disperse the rioting
mob and restore law and order situation. During the said
incident of dispersing mob and preventing rioting, the
deceased was injured and fell into water, drowned in the
lake and declared dead on being taken to the hospital.
According to Mr. Tulsi, all acts were committed by the
appellant while exercising powers, discharging duties and
performing functions as police officer and as such the
provisions of Section 197 of the Code were clearly
attracted. It was submitted by Mr. Tulsi that admittedly, no
sanction was obtained from the Government before
instituting proceedings against the appellant. The
proceedings were, therefore, not tenable. The learned
Magistrate, therefore, was wrong in taking cognizance, in
issuing non-bailable warrant and proceeding with the case.
Mr. Tulsi submitted that absence of sanction as required by
Section 197 goes to the root of the matter and no
proceedings could be initiated in absence of such sanction
and the proceedings are required to be dropped.
Mr. Tulsi also submitted that as is clear, the
complainant had filed a complaint on May 11, 2001 and in
the said complaint it was expressly stated that her husband
had met with death due to beating by police officers. An
entry was made to that effect and a case was registered as
PS Case No.112 of 2001 for an offence punishable under
Section 304 IPC by Phoolbagan Police Station on May 12,
2001. Subsequently, even Section 302 IPC was added.
Considering that fact also, a private complaint instituted by
the complainant in the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate
on May 28, 2001 for offences punishable under Sections
302, 201, 109 and 120B IPC was required to be stayed
under Section 210 of the Code which provides for
procedure to be followed in such cases.
Mr. Pradip Kumar Ghosh, learned senior counsel for
the complainant, on the other hand, supported the action
taken by the Chief Judicial Magistrate and the order passed
by the High Court. He submitted that the acts committed
by the appellant and other police officers were totally
illegal, unlawful and in violation of law of the land. The
deceased was chased, assaulted, severely beaten and killed
by the appellant and other police officials. Section 197 hashttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 16
no application in such cases. According to the learned
counsel, the High Court has considered the entire material
in its proper perspective and held that in the facts and
circumstances of the case, Section 197 could not be
invoked. The said order cannot be said to be illegal or
contrary to law.
The counsel also submitted that no action whatsoever
has been taken on the basis of the complaint filed by the
complainant on May 11, 2001 and hence Section 210 was
not attracted. The learned Magistrate, therefore, was
wholly justified in entertaining the complaint filed by the
complainant, in taking cognizance and issuing arrest
warrants. The counsel also submitted that in view of the
fact that the action of the appellant and police officers was
totally illegal and an innocent person was killed that non
bailable warrants were issued. The said action was
challenged by the accused but the High Court as well as
this Court did not interfere with the order and dismissed
the application for anticipatory bail. The counsel also made
grievance that the State and the police force of the
respondent State were virtually supporting and illegally
helping the appellant and other police officials which is clear
from the fact that even though non bailable warrant was
issued against the accused persons in June, 2001 and the
said action was confirmed by the High Court and also by
this Court as early as in 2003, till today, the appellant has
not been arrested. He, therefore, submitted that no case
has been made out for interference by this Court and the
appeal deserves to be dismissed.
Mr. Avijit Bhattacharjee, learned counsel appearing
for the State relied upon the affidavit filed on behalf of the
State.
The questions which arise for our consideration are,
firstly, whether in the facts and circumstances of the case,
Section 197 of the Code is attracted and sanction as
required by that section is sine qua non for prosecuting the
appellant and other police officers and whether the Chief
Judicial Magistrate was justified in taking cognizance of the
complaint filed by the complainant and proceeding with the
complaint, and secondly, whether the case is covered by
Section 210 of the Code and the private complaint filed by
the complainant in the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate on
May 28, 2001 against the accused persons for offences
punishable under Sections 302, 201, 109 and 120B IPC
could be proceeded with or required to be stayed?
Before I deal with the material placed on record, it
would be appropriate to consider the legal position. Section
197 of the Code provides for sanction of prosecution of
certain public servants. The relevant part thereof reads
thus:
197 Prosecution of Judges and Public
Servants.
(1) When any person who is or was a Judge or
Magistrate or a public servant not removable
from his office save by or with the sanction of the
Government is accused of any offence alleged to
have been committed by him while acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duty, no Court shall take cognizance of such
offence except with the previous sanction -
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or,
as the case may be, was at the time of
commission of the alleged offence employed, in
connection with the affairs of the Union, of the
Central Government;http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 16
(b) in the case of a person who is employed or,
as the case may be, was at the time of
commission of the alleged offence employed, in
connection with the affairs of a State, of the
State Government.
\005 \005 \005 \005 \005 \005 \005 \005 \005
(4) The Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, may determine
the person by whom, the manner in which, and
the offence or offences or which, the prosecution
of such Judge, Magistrate or public servant is to
be conducted, and may specify the Court before
which the trial is to be held.
It is the case of the appellant that whatever he has
done has done "while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty" and Section 197 bars a Court
from taking cognizance of such offence except with the
previous sanction of the State Government. Since there is
no sanction of the State Government, the Chief Judicial
Magistrate could not have taken cognizance of the case and
the complaint was liable to be dismissed.
But the case of the complainant is that there was no
need or necessity to take sanction of the State Government
as the appellant and other police officers had deliberately,
intentionally and willfully caused death of her husband.
The said act was not done in discharge of duty or even
under colour of duty but it has been done by them by
taking undue advantage of their position. The case was of
murder, pure and simple. The learned Magistrate took into
account all relevant facts and material placed before him
and held that the sanction was not necessary. The High
Court was, therefore, justified in dismissing the application.
So far as the provisions of the Section 197 are
concerned, they came up for judicial interpretation in
several cases. One of the leading cases which has been
referred to in several decisions thereafter was of Dr. Hori
Ram Singh v. Emperor, [1939 FCR 159 : AIR 1939 FC 43].
Their Lordships of the Federal Court in Dr. Hori Ram Singh
were called upon to consider Section 270 of the
Government of India Act, 1935 which was similar to
Section 197 of the present Code. Sulaiman, J., interpreting
the said section, observed that the question of good faith
or bad faith would not strictly arise in interpreting the
provision inasmuch as the words used in the section were
not only "any act done in the execution of his duty" but
also "any act purporting to be done in the execution of
duty". It was, therefore, held that when the act is not
done in the execution of the duty, but is purported to be
done in the execution of the duty, it would be covered.
The learned Judge stated; "Obviously the section does
not mean that the very act which is the gravamen of the
charge and constitutes the offence should be official duty of
the servant of the Crown. Such an interpretation would
involve a contradiction in terms, because an offence can
never be an official duty. The words as used in the Section
are not "in respect of any official duty" but "in respect of
any act done or purporting to be done in the execution of
his duty". The two expressions are obviously not identical.
The offence should have been committed when an act is
done in the execution of duty or when an act purports to be
done in the execution of the duty. The reference is
obviously to an offence committed in the course of an
action, which is taken or purports to be taken in
compliance with an official duty, and is in fact connected
with it. The test appears to be not that the offence ishttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 6 of 16
capable of being committed only by a public servant and
not by any one else, but that it is committed by a public
servant in an act done or purporting to be done in the
execution of his duty. The section cannot be confined to
only such acts as are done by a public servant directly in
pursuance of his public office, though in excess of the duty
or under a mistaken belief as to the existence of such duty.
Nor is it necessary to go to the length of saying that the act
constituting the offence should be so inseparably connected
with the official duty as to form part and parcel of the same
transaction. If the act complained of is an offence, it must
necessarily be not an execution of duty, but a dereliction of
it. What is necessary is that the offence must be in respect
of an act done or purported to be done in execution of
duty, that is, in the discharge of an official duty. It must
purport to be done in the official capacity with which he
pretends to be clothed at the time, that is to say under the
cloak of an ostensibly official act, though of course, the
offence would really amount to a breach of duty. An act
cannot purport to be done in execution of duty unless the
offender professes to be acting in pursuance of his official
duty and means to convey to the mind of another, the
impression that he is so acting."
It was, however, stated\027
"The section is not intended to apply to acts done
purely in a private capacity by a public servant. It
must have been ostensibly done by him in his
official capacity in execution of his duty, which
would not necessarily be the case merely
because it was done at a time when he held such
office, nor even necessarily because he was
engaged in his official business at the time. For
instance, if a public servant accepts as a reward
a bribe in his office while actually engaged in
some official work, he is not accepting it even in
his official capacity, much less in the execution of
any official duty, although it is quite certain that
he could never have been able to take the bribe
unless he were the official in charge of some
official work. He does not even pretend to the
person who offers the bribe that he is acting in
the discharge of his official duty, but merely uses
his official position to obtain the illegal
gratification." (emphasis supplied)
In the concurring opinion, Varadachariar, J. stated\027
"It only remains to deal with the arguments
urged on the one side or the other as to the test
to be applied in determining whether or not the
act complained of is one "purporting to be done
in execution of his duty" as a public servant. I
would observe at the outset that the question is
substantially one of fact, to be determined with
reference to the act complained of and the
attendant circumstances; it seems neither useful
nor desirable to paraphrase the language of the
section in attempting to lay down hard and fast
tests." (emphasis supplied)
In H.H.B. Gill & another v. King, (75 IA 41:AIR 1948
PC 128), the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council had an
occasion to deal with the provisions of Section 197 of the
Code in juxtaposition of Section 270 of the Government of
India Act, 1935. Referring to Dr. Hori Ram Singh and
applying the ratio laid down therein, their Lordships
observed that a public servant can only be said to act or
purport to act in the discharge of his official duty, if his acthttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 7 of 16
is such as to lie within the scope of his official duty. The
Judicial Committee proceeded to state that in considering
Section 197, ’much assistance’ could be derived from the
Judgment of Dr. Hori Ram Singh.
It then formulated the test thus:
"A public servant can only be said to act or to
purport to act in the discharge of his official duty,
if his act is such as to lie within the scope of his
official duty. Thus, a Judge neither acts nor
purports to act as a Judge in receiving a bribe,
though the judgment which he delivers may be
such an act; nor does a Government medical
officer act or purport to act as a public servant in
picking the pocket of a patient whom he is
examining, though the examination itself may be
such an act. The test may well be whether the
public servant, if challenged, can reasonably
claim that, what he does, he does in virtue of his
office." (emphasis supplied)
Shreekantiah Ramayya Munipalli & another v. State of
Bombay, [1955 (1) SCR 1177 : AIR 1955 SC 287] was
probably the first leading decision of this Court on the
point. Keeping in view the underlying object behind
Section 197 and referring to Dr. Hori Ram Singh as also
H.H.B. Gill, Vivian Bose, J. stated:
"Now it is obvious that if section 197 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure is construed too
narrowly it can never be applied, for of course it
is not part of an official’s duty to commit an
offence and never can be. But it is not the duty
we have to examine so much as the act,
because an official act can be performed in the
discharge of official duty as well as in dereliction
of it. (emphasis supplied)
Again, in Amrik Singh v. State of Pepsu, [1955 (1)
SCR 1302 : AIR 1955 SC 309], this Court held that it is not
every offence committed by a public servant that requires
sanction for prosecution under Section 197(1) of the Code,
nor every act done by him while he is actually engaged in
the performance of his official duties, so that, if questioned,
it could be claimed to have been done by virtue of the
office. It is only when the act complained of is directly
connected with his official duties that sanction is necessary.
Speaking for the Court, Venkatarama Ayyar, J.
referring to the relevant decisions on the point, formulated
the principle:
"The result of the authorities may thus be
summed up : It is not every offence committed
by a public servant that requires sanction for
prosecution under section 197(1) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure; nor even every act done by
him while he is actually engaged in the
performance of his official duties; but if the act
complained of is directly concerned with his
official duties so that, if questioned, it could be
claimed to have been done by virtue of the
office, then sanction would be necessary; and
that would be so, irrespective of whether it was,
in fact, a proper discharge of his duties,
because that would really be a matter of
defence on the merits, which would have to be
investigated at the trial, and could not arise at
the stage of the grant of sanction, which must
precede the institution of the prosecution."
A reference may be made to a decision of thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 8 of 16
Constitution Bench in Matajog Dobey v. H.C. Bhari, [1955
(2) SCR 925 : AIR 1956 SC 44]. Holding Section 197 of the
Code constitutional and not discriminatory and violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution, the Court stated that the
primary object of Section 197 was to protect public
servants from harassment in the discharge of their official
duties. Delivering the judgment for the Bench,
Chandrasekhara Aiyar, J. said:
"The offence alleged to have been committed
must have something to do, or must be related
in some manner, with the discharge of official
duty. No question of sanction can arise under
section 197, unless the act complained of is an
offence; the only point to determine is whether
it was committed in the discharge of official
duty. There must be a reasonable connection
between the act and the official duty. It does
not matter even if the act exceeds what is
strictly necessary for the discharge of the duty,
as this question will arise only at a later stage
when the trial proceeds on the merits. What we
must find out is whether the act and the official
duty are so inter-related that one can postulate
reasonably that it was done by the accused in
the performance of the official duty, though
possibly in excess of the needs and
requirements of the situation." (emphasis
supplied)
The Bench also considered the question that if such
sanction is necessary at any stage, it should be obtained at
that stage. It was also indicated that such question may
arise "at any stage of the proceeding". The complaint may
not disclose that the act constituting the offence was done
or purported to be done in the discharge of the official duty
but the facts subsequently coming to light on a police
report or judicial inquiry or even in the course of the
prosecution evidence at the trial, may establish the
necessity for sanction. The Court, therefore, concluded:
"Whether sanction is necessary or not may have to be
determined from stage to stage. The necessity may reveal
itself in the course of the progress of the case."
In P. Arulswami v. State of Madras, [1967 (1) SCR
201 : AIR 1967 SC 776], their Lordships stated:- "It is the
quality of the act that is important and if it falls within the
scope and range of his official duties, the protection
contemplated by Section 197 of the Criminal Procedure
Code will be attracted". If the act is totally unconnected
with the official duty, there can be no protection. It is only
when it is either within the scope of the official duty or in
excess of it that the protection is claimable.
In Pukhraj v. State of Rajasthan & Another, [(1973) 2
SCC 701 : 1974 (1) SCR 551], after considering several
cases on the point, the Court observed that though the
principle is well settled, the real difficulty lies in applying it
to the factual situation.
The Court observed\027
"While the law is well settled the difficulty really
arises in applying the law to the fact to any
particular case. The intention behind the section
is to prevent public servants from being
unnecessarily harassed. The section is not
restricted only to cases of anything purported to
be done in good faith, for a person who
ostensibly acts in execution of his duty still
purports so to act, although he may havehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 9 of 16
dishonest intention. Nor is it confined to cases
where the act, which constitutes the offence, is
the official duty of the official concerned. Such
an interpretation would involve a contradiction
in terms, because an offence can never be an
official duty. The test appears to be not that the
offence is capable of being committed only by a
public servant and not by anyone else, but that
it is committed by a public servant in an act
done or purporting to be done in the execution
of duty. (emphasis supplied)
In B. Saha & others v. M.S. Kochar, [(1979) 4 SCC
177], this Court stated that for the application of Section
197 of the Code, there must be direct and reasonable
nexus between the offence committed and the discharge of
official duty. It may happen that a particular act might
have been committed by a public servant in the discharge
of his duty or purported to be in discharge of his duty but
he might have acted illegally and unlawfully if the other act
complained of would be outside the ambit of Section 197 of
the Code. In B. Saha, the Court observed that though the
initial action of seizure of the goods by the public servant
was an act committed by him while acting in discharge of
his official duty, subsequent act of dishonest
misappropriation or conversion of goods could not be said
to be in discharge or purported discharge of duty. For that
act, he cannot get protection of Section 197 of the Code.
The Court also observed that the question of sanction
under Section 197 of the Code can be raised and
considered at any stage of the proceedings. Moreover,
while considering the question whether or not sanction for
prosecution was required, it is not necessary for the Court
to confine itself to the allegation in the complaint alone and
it can take into account all the material on record at that
time when the question is raised and falls for consideration.
In Bakhshish Singh Brar v. Gurmej Kaur & Another,
[(1987) 4 SCC 663], this Court held that when police
officers were accused of causing grievous injuries and
death while conducting raid and search, it could not be said
that they were acting in purported discharge of their official
duty but if while discharging duty, they exceeded the limits
of such official capacity, sanction under Section 197 of the
Code would be necessary. While insisting on the need and
necessity to protect public servants, the Court also
emphasized the protection of rights of citizens.
The Court stated\027
"It is necessary to protect the public servants in
the discharge of their duties. They must be
made immune from being harassed in criminal
proceedings and prosecution, that is the
rationale behind Section 196 and Section 197 of
the CrPC. But it is equally important to
emphasise that rights of the citizens should be
protected and no excesses should be permitted.
"Encounter death" has become too common. In
the facts and circumstances of each case
protection of public officers and public servants
functioning in discharge of official duties and
protection of private citizens have to be
balanced by finding out as to what extent and
how far is a public servant working in discharge
of his duties or purported discharge of his
duties, and whether the public servant has
exceeded his limit. It is true that Section 196
states that no cognizance can be taken andhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 10 of 16
even after cognizance having been taken if facts
come to light that the acts complained of were
done in the discharge of the official duties then
the trial may have to be stayed unless sanction
is obtained. But at the same time it has to be
emphasised that criminal trials should not be
stayed in all cases at the preliminary stage
because that will cause great damaged to the
evidence."
In P.K. Pradhan v. State of Sikkim, [(2001) 6 SCC
704], after referring to relevant case law on the point, it
was observed that different tests have been laid down to
ascertain the scope and meaning of the relevant words
occurring in Section 197 "any offence alleged to have been
committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty". It was then stated that the
offence alleged to have been committed must have
something to do, or must relate in some manner, with the
discharge of official duty of a public servant. No question of
sanction would arise under Section 197, unless the act
complained of is an offence; the only point for
determination is whether it was committed in the discharge
of official duty. There must be a reasonable connection
between the act and the official duty. It does not matter
even if the act exceeds what is strictly necessary for the
discharge of the duty, as that question would arise only at
a later stage when the trial proceeds on the merits. What a
court must consider is whether the act and the official duty
are so interrelated that one can postulate reasonably that it
was done by the accused in the performance of official
duty. If the answer to the said question is in affirmative,
Section 197 will be attracted, but not otherwise. This Court
reiterated that the question as to applicability of Section
197 of the Code can be raised at any stage of the
proceedings. In order to come to the conclusion, whether
the claim of the accused that the act he had committed
was in the course of performance of his duty was a
reasonable one and neither pretended nor fanciful can be
examined during the course of trial by giving opportunity to
the defence to establish it and the question of sanction
would be left to be decided in the main judgment which
may be delivered upon at the conclusion of the trial.
In State of Orissa v. Ganesh Chandra Jew, [(2004) 8
SCC 40], it was held that the expression "any offence
alleged to have been committed by public servant while
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duty" implies that the act or omission must have been done
by the public servant in the course of his service and that it
should fall within the scope and range of his official duty. It
was then observed that the test is whether omission or
neglect to do that act would be brought on a public
servant, the charge of dereliction of his official duty. The
protection is available only when the alleged act done by
the public servant is reasonable, connected with the
discharge of his official duty and is not merely a cloak for
doing the objectionable act [vide S.K. Zutshi v. Bimal
Debnath (2004) 8 SCC 31].
In K. Kalimuthu v. State by DSP [(2005) 4 SCC 512],
it was stated that the protection given under Section 197 of
the Code is to protect responsible public servants against
the institution of possibly vexatious criminal proceedings
for offences alleged to have been committed by them while
they are acting or purporting to act as public servants. The
policy of the legislature is to afford adequate protection to
public servants to ensure that they are not prosecuted forhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 11 of 16
anything done by them in the discharge of their official
duties without reasonable cause, and if sanction is granted,
to confer on the Government, if they choose to exercise it,
complete control of the prosecution. But the said protection
has certain limits and is available only when the alleged act
done by the public servant is reasonably connected with
the discharge of his official duty and is not merely a cloak
for doing the objectionable act.
It was, therefore, observed\027
"Before Section 197 can be invoked, it must be
shown that the official concerned was accused
of an offence alleged to have been committed
by him while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duties. It is not the duty
which requires examination so much as the act,
because the official act can be performed both
in the discharge of the official duty as well as in
dereliction of it. The act must fall within the
scope and range of the official duties of the
public servant concerned. It is the quality of the
act which is important and the protection of this
section is available if the act falls within the
scope and range of his official duty. There
cannot be any universal rule to determine
whether there is a reasonable connection
between the act done and the official duty, nor
is it possible to lay down any such rule. One
safe and sure test in this regard would be to
consider if the omission or neglect on the part
of the public servant to commit the act
complained of could have made him answerable
for a charge of dereliction of his official duty. If
the answer to this question is in the affirmative,
it may be said that such act was committed by
the public servant while acting in the discharge
of his official duty and there was every
connection with the act complained of and the
official duty of the public servant. (emphasis
supplied)
Recently, in Rakesh Kumar Mishra v. State of Bihar &
Others, [(2006) 1 SCC 557], this Court restated the object
behind enacting Section 197 of the Code and also
prerequisites for application thereof.
The Court stated\027
"The protection given under Section 197 is to
protect responsible public servants against the
institution of possibly vexatious criminal
proceedings for offences alleged to have been
committed by them while they are acting or
purporting to act as public servants. The policy
of the legislature is to afford adequate protection
to public servants to ensure that they are not
prosecuted for anything done by them in the
discharge of their official duties without
reasonable cause, and if sanction is granted, to
confer on the Government, if it chooses to
exercise it, complete control of the prosecution.
This protection has certain limits and is available
only when the alleged act done by the public
servant is reasonably connected with the
discharge of his official duty and is not merely a
cloak for doing the objectionable act. If in doing
his official duty, he acted in excess of his duty,
but there is a reasonable connection between the
act and the performance of the official duty, thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 12 of 16
excess will not be a sufficient ground to deprive
the public servant from the protection. The
question is not as to the nature of the offence
such as whether the alleged offence contained an
element necessarily dependent upon the offender
being a public servant, but whether it was
committed by a public servant acting or
purporting to act as such in the discharge of his
official capacity. Before Section 197 can be
invoked, it must be shown that the official
concerned was accused of an offence alleged to
have been committed by him while acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duties. It is not the duty which requires
examination so much as the act, because the
official act can be performed both in the
discharge of the official duty as well as in
dereliction of it. The act must fall within the
scope and range of the official duties of the
public servant concerned. It is the quality of the
act which is important and the protection of this
section is available if the act falls within the
scope and range of his official duty. There
cannot be any universal rule to determine
whether there is a reasonable connection
between the act done and the official duty, nor is
it possible to lay down any such rule. One safe
and sure test in this regard would be to consider
if the omission or neglect on the part of the
public servant to commit the act complained of
could have made him answerable for a charge of
dereliction of his official duty: if the answer to
this question is in the affirmative, it may be said
that such act was committed by the public
servant while acting in the discharge of his
official duty and there was every connection with
the act complained of and the official duty of the
public servant. This aspect makes it clear that
the concept of Section 197 does not get
immediately attracted on institution of the
complaint case." (Emphasis supplied)
From the aforesaid decisions, in my opinion, the law
appears to be well settled. The primary object of the
Legislature behind Section 197 of the Code is to protect
public officers who have acted in discharge of their duties
or purported to act in discharge of such duties. But, it is
equally well settled that the act said to have been
committed by public officer must have reasonable
connection with the duty sought to be discharged by such
public officer. If the act complained of has no nexus,
reasonable connection or relevance to the official act or
duty of such public servant and is otherwise illegal,
unlawful or in the nature of an offence, he cannot get
shelter under Section 197 of the Code. In other words,
protection afforded by the said section is qualified and
conditional.
Mr. Tulsi, no doubt, submitted that the appellant was
a police officer. He was on duty. He had received a
message about rioting and law and order situation at
Baliaghata. He, therefore, had gone to the spot pursuant
to the said message, in police uniform, in police jeep to
deal with the situation. All the ingredients of Section 197
of the Code were thus satisfied and the High Court was
wrong in not applying the said provision.
I am unable to agree with Mr. Tulsi. In my judgment,http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 13 of 16
it is precisely in such cases that the Court is called upon to
consider whether the public servant was acting or
purporting to act in discharge of his duty or it was merely a
cloak for doing illegal act under the excuse of his status as
a public servant and by taking undue advantage of his
position, he was committing an offence or an unlawful act.
In such situations, when the question comes up for
consideration before a Court of law as to the applicability or
otherwise of Section 197 of the Code, it is not only the
power but the duty of the Court to apply its mind to the
fact-situation before it. It should ensure that on the one
hand, the public servant is protected if the case is covered
by Section 197 of the Code and on the other hand,
appropriate action would be allowed to be taken if the
provision is not attracted and under the guise of his
position as public servant, he is trying to take undue
advantage.
In the instant case, from the material which has been
placed on record, it is amply clear that the appellant and
other police officers had acted illegally, unlawfully and
highhandedly. In the complaint, it was stated by the widow
of deceased Topi Das that the accused chased her husband
and assaulted him by causing several injuries which
resulted in his death. But, apart from what is stated in the
complaint, the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate had
recorded statements of witnesses mentioned in the
complaint. The learned counsel for the first respondent-
complainant, drew our attention to those statements who
were eye-witnesses. It was stated by them that the
deceased had not indulged in any illegal activity. He had
not done any unlawful act. He had no weapon with him.
He was distributing food packets at the polling booth of a
particular political party. He was assaulted and beaten by
accused persons who were police officers. When the
deceased left the place, the police officers chased him and
continued to beat him. When deceased reached near a
lake, he requested the police officers not to beat him. He
also stated that he did not know how to swim and prayed
to leave him. But the police officers did not pay any heed
to his request and continued beating, which resulted in his
death.
Dr. Rabindra Basu, who performed post mortem
examination, stated that he found the following injuries on
the person of Topi Das:
"1. One abrasion with a reddish crust 1.4 inches
x .3 inch more or less transversely placed
across left side of forehead lower part being
placed 1 inch above lateral 1/3rd left eye
brow.
2. One abrasion .4 inch x .3 inch with reddish
crust placed 1 inch above medical end of
left eyebrow and = inch lateral to midline.
3. One linear abrasion .6 inch x .1 inch with
reddish crust over lateral aspect of
uppermost part of left forearm.
4. One abrasion = x .1 inch with reddish crust
over postern lateral aspect of upper 1/3rd of
left forearm.
5. One abrasion = x .1 inch over dorsum of left
hand.
6. One linear abrasion .4 inch x .1 inch with
reddish rust over dorsal aspect of web
between index and middle finger."
On internal examination, he noticed the
following injuries:http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 14 of 16
1. One heomotoma in the scalp tissue 3 =
inches x 2 inches over right temporal region.
2. One heamotoma in the scalp tissue over
vault of the skull 4 inch x .4 inch over parieto
occipitial region, of scalp.
3. One heamotoma in the scalp tissue over
vault of the skull 4 inch x 3 inches involving left
parieto topper region.
4. One heamotoma 2 = inches x 1 = inch over
left frontal region (forhead).
5. Exgradural Hemorrhage over vault of the
brain involving posterior aspects of both
partietal lobes.
6. Thin layscror sub-aural hemorrhage all over
both the cerebral homlsphered inching under
surfaced.
He then stated:
"All the internal organs were congested.
Laryenz and trachnoes was found congested
and the lumen was filled up with shaving
lathery froth with and sand seen even below
bifunction of trachoea. Lungs were voluminous,
doughy filled and on section and squeezing
occupious amount of frothy blood mixed fluid
come out. Heart showgrade-II atteroma at the
root of aorta.
On the basis of my findings I have the following
opinion: "Death was due to the effects of head
injuries associated with drawing ante-mortem
and homicidal in nature.
The injuries which I found are consisted with a
trauma caused by blunt weapon such as Lathi."
(Emphasis supplied)
The High Court, in my judgment, considered this
aspect in its proper perspective and was wholly justified in
observing that "it was a merciless beating by a police
officer" causing death of a person which could not be said
to be an act in discharge of official duty. The High Court
was also right in stating that postmortem report clearly
indicated the nature and extent of injuries on the victim.
Other witnesses had given vivid description of the offence
committed by the accused persons. The said finding, which
is supported by material on record, cannot be said to be
based on ’no evidence’ or otherwise perverse, nor it can be
concluded that an error of law has been committed by the
High Court which requires to be corrected by this Court in
the exercise of discretionary jurisdiction under Article 136
of the Constitution. Hence, in my opinion, no interference
is called for against the said order.
In my view, even Section 210 of the Code has no
application to the facts of the case on hand. Section 210
requires procedure to be followed when there is a
complaint case and police investigation in respect of the
same offence and reads thus:
210 Procedure to be followed when there
is a complaint case and police investigation
in respect of the same offence.
(1) When in a case instituted otherwise than on
a police report (hereinafter referred to as a
complaint case), it is made to appear to the
Magistrate, during the course of the inquiry or
trial held by him, that an investigation by the
police is in progress in relation to the offence
which is the subject matter of the inquiry or
trial held by him, the Magistrate shall stay thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 15 of 16
proceedings of such inquiry or trial and call for a
report on the matter from the police officer
conducting the investigation.
(2) If a report is made by the investigating
police officer under Section 173 and on such
report cognizance of any offence to taken by
the Magistrate against any person who an
accused in the complaint case, the Magistrate
shall inquire together the complaint case and
the case arising out of the police report as if
both the cases were instituted on a police
report.
(3) If the police report does not relate to any
accused in the complaint case or if the
Magistrate does not take cognizance of any
offence on the police report, he shall proceed
with the inquiry or trial, which was stayed by
him in accordance with the provision of this
code.
Bare reading of the above provision makes it clear
that during an inquiry or trial relating to a complaint case,
if it is brought to the notice of the Magistrate that an
investigation by the police is in progress in respect of the
same offence, he shall stay the proceedings of the
complaint case and call for the record of the police officer
conducting the investigation.
The object of enacting Section 210 of the Code is
three fold:
(i) it is intended to ensure that private
complaints do not interfere with the course of
justice;
(ii) it prevents harassment to the accused
twice; and
(iii) it obviates anomalies which might arise
from taking cognizance of the same offence
more than once.
The Joint Committee of Parliament observed:
"It has been brought to the notice of the
Committee that sometimes when serious case is
under investigation by the police, some of the
persons file complaint and quickly get an order
of acquittal either by cancellation or otherwise.
Thereupon the investigation of the case
becomes infructuous leading to miscarriage of
justice in some cases. To avoid this, the
Committee has provided that where a complaint
is filed and the Magistrate has information that
the police is also investigating the same
offence, the Magistrate shall stay the complaint
case. If the police report (under Section 173) is
received in the case, the Magistrate should try
together the complaint case and the case
arising out of the police report. But if no such
case is received the Magistrate would be free to
dispose of the complaint case. This new
provision is intended to secure that private
complainants do not interfere with the course of
justice." (emphasis supplied)
It is thus clear that before Section 210 can be
invoked, the following conditions must be satisfied.
(i) There must be a complaint pending for inquiry
or trial;
(ii) Investigation by the police must be in progress
in relation to the same offence;
(iii) A report must have been made by the policehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 16 of 16
officer under Section 173; and
(iv) The magistrate must have taken cognizance of
an offence against a person who is accused in
the complaint case.
In the impugned order passed by the High Court, no
such contention appears to have been raised by the
appellant. On the basis of the complaint filed by the
complainant and on being satisfied on the material placed
on record, the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Alipore had
proceeded with the case which cannot be said to be illegal.
It may also be stated here that the High Court in its
order, dated June 20, 2003 considered this contention and
observed that Section 210 of the Code could not arrest the
proceedings initiated by the complainant, since the ’basic
tenor of the two cases were different.’ Relying on the
decision of this Court in Harjinder Singh v. State of Punjab,
(AIR 1985 SC 404), it was submitted that both the cases
could not be clubbed together since the prosecution version
was quite different in those cases. It may be stated that
Special Leave Petition against the order of the High Court
was dismissed by this Court on July 28, 2003. Even this
ground, therefore, cannot take the case of the appellant
anywhere.
I am constrained to observe here that there is
considerable force in the allegation of the learned counsel
for the complainant that the State agency had shown
partisan attitude and favoured the appellant. This is clear
from the fact that though the application of the appellant
for anticipatory bail was rejected by the High Court as well
as by this Court before about three years, the appellant
was never arrested by the police.
For the foregoing reasons, in my opinion, the order
passed by the High Court is in consonance with well settled
principles of law and does not deserve interference under
Article 136 of the Constitution. The appeal, therefore,
deserves to be dismissed and accordingly dismissed.
Interim stay granted earlier stands vacated.
It may be stated at this stage that the incident is of
May, 2001 and about five years have passed. It is,
therefore, necessary that the proceedings must be
concluded as expeditiously as possible. The learned Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Alipore is, therefore, directed to
proceed with the case with utmost expedition as directed
by the High Court.
Before parting with the matter, I may clarify that all
the observations made by me hereinabove have been only
for the limited purpose of deciding the controversy in
connection with the applicability or otherwise of Sections
197 and 210 of the Code and I may not be understood to
have expressed any opinion one way or the other on the
merits of the case. As and when the matter comes before
an appropriate Court, it may be decided strictly on its own
merits without being influenced/inhibited by the above
observations.
For the foregoing reasons, the appeal deserves to be
dismissed and it is accordingly dismissed.