http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 3
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 549 of 2001
PETITIONER:
STATE OF KERALA
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
M. M. MANIKANTAN NAIR
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 25/04/2001
BENCH:
K.T. Thomas, R.P. Sethi & S.N. Variava
JUDGMENT:
PHUKAN, J.
Leave is granted.
L...I...T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T..J
The respondent has been booked for trial along with@@
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
another accused for offences punishable under Section 120B,
409, 468, 471 and 477 of IPC and Section 13(1)(c) read with
Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
The allegation against the respondent No.1 was that while he
was working as the Secretary of Melukavu Grama Panchayat
along with another accused, who was the Head Clerk of the
Panchayat, committed criminal conspiracy to misappropriate
the funds of the Panchayat which was earmarked for
construction of waiting sheds, Tribal training centres etc.
and misappropriated large amount by creating bogus receipts
and bills and thereby committed the above offences.
Initially the respondent was placed under suspension and
subsequently was allowed to retire from service on attaining
superannuation.
The respondent filed a revision petition under Section
482 of the Criminal Procedure Code before the High Court of
Kerala for quashing the said criminal proceeding on the
ground that there was no sanction to prosecute him as
required under Section 122 of the Kerala Panchayat Act.
That petition viz. Crl.M.C. No.1137 of 2000 was dismissed
by the learned single Judge of the High Court by judgment
dated 31st May, 2000 on the grounds that there was proper
sanction to prosecute the respondent and a prima facie case
was made out against him. Subsequently, a miscellaneous
petition was filed in the above criminal case by the
respondent for clarification of the above order. This
petition was finally allowed by the impugned order dated
13.07.2000 by the same learned Judge holding that there was
no proper sanction from the competent authority and,
therefore, no cognizance could have been taken against him.
Being aggrieved, the State has approached this court.
The first question which needs our consideration ishttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 3
whether the impugned order dated 13.07.2000 passed by the@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
learned single Judge clarifying the earlier order dated@@
JJJJJJJ
31.05.2000 holding that no cognizance against the respondent
could have been taken for want of proper sanction is valid
or not.
The first order dated 31.05.2000 is a composite order by
which the petition under Section 482 of Criminal Procedure
Code was dismissed on the grounds as stated above. By way
of clarification, this order was reversed by the impugned
order and the criminal proceeding was quashed for want of
proper sanction.
The Code of Criminal Procedure does not authorise the
High Court to review its judgment or order passed either in
exercise of its appellate, revisional or original
jurisdiction. Section 362 of the Code prohibits the court
after it has signed its judgment or final order disposing a
case from altering or reviewing the said judgment or order
except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error. This
prohibition is complete and no criminal court can review its
own judgment or order after it is signed. By the first
order dated 31.05.2000, the High Court rejected the prayer
of the respondent for quashing the criminal proceeding.
This order attained its finality. By the impugned order,
the High Court reversed its earlier order and quashed the
criminal proceeding for want of proper sanction. By no
stretch of imagination it can be said that by the impugned
order the High Court only corrected any clerical or
arithmetical error. In fact the impugned order is an order
of review, as the earlier order was reversed, which could
not have been done as there is no such provision under the
Code of Criminal Procedure, but there is an interdict
against it.
This court in Hari Singh Mann versus Harbhajan Singh
Bajwa & Ors. [2001 (1) SCC 169] held that Section 362 of
the Criminal Procedure Code mandates that no court, when it
has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case
shall alter or review the same except to correct a clerical
or an arithmetical error and that this section is based on
an acknowledged principle of law that once a matter is
finally disposed of by a court, the said court in the
absence of a specific statutory provision becomes functus
officio and disentitled to entertain a fresh prayer for the
same relief unless the former order of final disposal is set
aside by the court of competent jurisdiction.
The next question that we have to answer is whether
sanction to prosecute under sub-section (1) of Section 122@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
of the Kerala Panchayat Act is necessary in the present@@
JJJJJJJ
case. We extract below the said sub-section:
Sanction for Prosecution of President, Executive
Authority or members of a Panchayat (i) When the President,
Executive Authority or any member is accused of any offence
alleged to have been committed by him while acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, no
Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the
previous sanction of this Government.http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 3
The language of Section 122 is clear and unambiguous.
Sanction to prosecute the President, Executive Authority or@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
members of a Panchayat is necessary for prosecution of any@@
JJJJJJJ
offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting
or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty.
If a person ceases to hold the above office on retirement or
otherwise no sanction for prosecution is necessary. The
petitioner who retired from the service could not claim
protection under this section as he ceased to hold the post
under the Panchayat.
Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, inter
alia, provides for previous sanction for prosecution and
such sanction is necessary if a person is employed in
connection with the affairs of the Union/State. This
section came up for consideration by this court and in State
of Kerala versus V. Padmanabhan [1999 (5) SCC 690] this
court held that a person who ceased to be a public servant
on the date when the court took cognizance, no sanction
under the above section is required. It is not necessary to
refer to other decisions of this court.
The Section 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code is the
corresponding provision for previous sanction of a public
servant for prosecution of offences in a criminal trial.
The language used in this section is when any person is or
was a public servant. This provision was considered by
this court in R. Balakrishna Pillai versus State of Kerala
& Anr. [1996 (1) SCC 478] and after referring to the report
of the Law Commission which suggests an amendment to above
section and accordingly it was amended in 1991, the bench
observed as follows:
It is in pursuance of this observation that the
expression was came to be employed after the expression
is to make the sanction applicable even in cases where a
retired public servant is sought to be prosecuted.
clear We are, therefore, of the opinion that in view of
language of sub-section (1) of Section 122 of the Kerala
Panchayat Act, sanction is required under the said
sub-section only if a person holds the office of President,
Executive Authority or any member and not otherwise. As the
respondent retired from service no previous sanction for
prosecution under this section is required.
In the result we hold that the High Court committed is@@
JJ
grave error in passing the impugned ord er and accordingly@@
JJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJ
appeal allowed by setting aside the said order.@@
JJJJJJ