http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 3
PETITIONER:
BALBIR SINGH & ANOTHER
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 20/08/1996
BENCH:
KURDUKAR S.P. (J)
BENCH:
KURDUKAR S.P. (J)
MUKHERJEE M.K. (J)
CITATION:
JT 1996 (7) 342 1996 SCALE (6)72
ACT:
HEADNOTE:
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
S.P. KURDUKAR, J.
This Criminal Appeal is directed against the judgment
and order dated June 24, 1985 passed by the Sessions Judge,
Special Court, Ferozepore, convicting both the appellants -
accused for an offence punishable under Section 302/34 IPC.
2. The appellants - accused were put up for trial
before the Special Court for committing the murder of Harbit
Singh alias Raju aged about five years. He was the son of
Mahinder Singh, the brother of Inder Singh (P.W.6). It is
the case of the prosecution that on December 14, 1984, Raju
while playing along with his friends in front of their
house, was found missing in the evening. A missing
information was lodged with the relatives of Raju searched
him throughout the night but could not trace him. However,
on 15th December, 1984 at about 7 p.m. these witnesses
noticed a crowd near the DAV College and after going there
the found the dead body of Raju lying near the school
compound. They also noticed that the amulet and rod which
were worn by the deceased Raju were missing. An FIR was then
lodged with the police station, city Fazilka and thereafter
investigation commenced. During the course of investigation
on 31.1.1985, the accused came to be arrested. The accused
being interrogated made a statement under Section 27 of the
Indian evidence Act which led to the recovery of amulet. It
also transpired during the investigation that the accused
made an extra judicial confession before one Pala Singh
(P.W.7), a Municipal Commissioner at Fazilka. As regards
motive, the prosecution case was that in the year 1971 Inder
Singh (PW 6) who was then unmarried, had a love affair with
Dialo, a sister of Balbir Singh (A-1) and once they were
caught in a compromising position. On seeing this Balbir
Singh (A-1) was terribly upset and on two occasions he had
challenged Inder Singh and told him that he will take a
revenge at the appropriate time. This love affair, according
to Inder Singh ended after he got married. Dialo was alsohttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 3
married very soon after the said incident. After completing
the investigation the accused were tried for the aforesaid
offences.
3. Both the accused pleaded not guilty to the charge
and claimed to be tried. According to them they are innocent
and they have been falsely implicated in the present crime.
4. The prosecution in support of its case relied upon
the evidence of as many as nine witnesses which included
Mohinder Singh (P.W.5), the father of the deceased Raju,
lnder Singh (P.W.6) the brother of Mohinder Singh and other
formal witnesses.
5. It is not and cannot be disputed that Raju met
with a homicidal death. It is needless to set out the
various injuries that were found on the dead body of Raju.
Dr. Inder Muhan Challana (P.W.1), who performed the autopsy
stated that Raju died due to several ante mortem injuries.
It can, therefore, be safely concluded that Raju met with a
homicidal death.
6. At the outset it may be stated that the
prosecution case rests upon circumstantial evidence. The
learned trial judge in paragraph 19 in his Judgment pointed
out five circumstances (A to E) and according to him each
one of them has been conclusively proved by the prosecution
and these circumstances if put together complete the chain
of circumstances to prove the guilt of the accused.
We may also state that the learned counsel appearing
for the parties did not dispute that these are the only five
circumstances on which the entire prosecution case rests:
(i) Motive;
(2) Medical evidence;
(3) Foot prints at the spot;
(4) Recovery of amulet and thread: (see sic rod) and
(5) Extra Judicial confession by the accused
7. Coming to the first circumstance, namely,the motive,
it is stated by Inder Singh (P.W.6) that he had developed
illicit relations in the year 1971 with Dialo, the sister of
accused No.1 and because of this, accused had a grudge
against his family members. On two occasions the accused
No.1 had challenged to take revenge. He admitted that
immediately thereafter he as well as Dialo were married
separately and thereafter no such relationship continued.
This circumstance found favour with the trial Judge but in
our opinion having regard to the passage of time and in the
absence of any incident during this long period of 14 years
it would be very difficult to accept the evidence of this
witness as regards the alleged motive. It is equally
improbable that A-1 would kill an innocent boy (Raju) who
was then just five years old. If at all accused No.1 had any
grievance it could be against Inder Singh and not against an
innocent child. In this view of the matter we are of the
opinion that the learned trial judge has committed a great
error in upholding that the prosecution has proved any
motive for the murder.
8. As far as the second circumstance, namely, medical
evidence is concerned as indicated earlier there is no
challenge whatsoever to the said evidence and we may safely
conclude that Raju met with a homicidal death.
9. Coming to the third circumstance, namely, foot
prints, this circumstance is although proved by the
prosecution but in our opinion it is a very weak
circumstance and on the basis of prints it be conclusively
said that these cannot prints were of the accused. It may
also he stated that only two foot prints were found whereas
there are two accused which means there ought to have been
four foot prints. There is no explanation whatsoever givenhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 3
by the prosecution in this behalf as also there is no
positive evidence to indicate as to whose foot prints they
were. In our opinion the learned trial Judge was wrong in
accepting this as a conclusive circumstance to establish the
complicity of the accused in the crime.
10. Coming to the next circumstance namely, recovery
of amulet and rod pursuant to the statement made by the
accused No.1 under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, in
our opinion this recovery is again a weak piece of evidence
because there were no special identity marks on both of
these art viz circumstance, therefore, is not conclusive to
prove the complicity of the accused.
11. Coming to the last circumstance, namely, extra
judicial confession alleged to have been made by accused
No.1, Balbir Singh tn Pala Singh (P.W.7), Municipal
Commissioner, Fazilka Municipal Committee, it has come on
the record that this witness had no special friendship with
either of the accused. Pala Singh (P.W.7) in his evidence
had vaguely stated that after about one and half month of
the incident Balbir Singh, accused No.1 contacted him and he
presence of Sajjan Singh, accused No.2 confessed the crime.
After through the evidence of this witness we are unable to
accept his evidence as trustworthy. It may also be stated
that as far as Sajjan Singh, accused No.2 is concerned there
is no evident whatsoever to connect him with the crime.
12. After going through the entire evidence the record
we are satisfied that the impugned order of conviction and
sentence is based on mere surmises and therefore, the
impugned order of conviction and sentence based against both
the accused is quashed and set aside and are acquitted. The
appeal is allowed.
13. This Court on 7.4.1992 ordered both the accused to
be released on bail to the satisfaction of Sessions Judge,
Ferozepur. If the accused were released on bail persuant to
the said order, their bail bonds in stand cancelled. In the
event they were unable to avail of that order, they be get
at liberty forthwith if not required in any other case.