http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 4
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 330 of 2000
PETITIONER:
State of Punjab
RESPONDENT:
Mohinder Singh & Ors
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 28/09/2007
BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT & D.K. JAIN
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 330 OF 2000
With
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 331 OF 2000
Dr. AR1J1T PASAYAT, J.
1. These two appeals are directed against a common
judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court dated 30th
August, 1995 in Criminal Appeal No. 208-DB of 1994. In the
said appeal, the present respondents questioned correctness
of the order of conviction passed by the learned Sessions
Judge, Amritsar. Accused-respondent Major Singh was found
guilty of offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (in short the ’IPC’). The co accused Jeet
Singh alias Ajit Singh, Mohinder Singh and Kulwant Singh
were found guilty of offence punishable under Section 302
read with Section 34 IPC. Each of the accused was sentenced
to imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.2,000/- with
default stipulation. For the offence relatable to Section 460
IPC, each of the accused was sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment for five years and to pay a fine of Rs.500/- with
default stipulation.
2. Background facts as projected by the prosecution during
the trial are as follows:
On 17.5.1991 at 8 p.m. Surjit Kaur (PW-4) and her
husband Dalip Singh (hereinafter referred to as ’deceased’)
were present in their house in village Leharka. At that time,
accused Mohinder Singh and Kulwant armed with dang, Jeet
Singh armed with a barchhi and Major Singh armed with a
kirpan came there and told her husband that he had been
abusing them in connection with the land dispute which
existed between them, so he would be taught a lesson. Saying
this, Mohinder Singh raised a lalkara to the effect that Dalip
Singh should be taught a lesson for asking his share of the
agricultural land, whereupon Kulwant Singh caught hold of
Dalip Singh and threw him on the ground. Jeet Singh then
gave a blow with barchhi, which hit Dalip Singh on the right
side of the chest while Major Singh gave a blow with kirpan,
which hit Dalip Singh on his left ear. Major Singh again gave a
blow with the kirpan, which hit Dalip Singh on his neck. In
the meantime, Surjit Kaur cried for help which attracted
Karnail Singh son of Shangara Singh and Ajit Singh son of
Chanan Singh. They all tried to intervene to save Dalip Singh.
Major Singh told them to stand aside lest they shall be
assaulted. Hearing this, Surjit Kaur, Karnail Singh and Ajithttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 4
Singh stood aside and Jeet Singh and his co-accused took the
body of Dalip Singh to the house of Ajit Singh. An electric bulb
was on in the courtyard of the house and Surjit Kaur (PW-4)
was thus, able to identify the accused. She thereafter, left for
the police Station Kathu Nangal and on the way near Talwandi
Phuman met ASI Rajinder Singh, (PW-9) and made statement
regarding the circumstances in which her husband had been
attacked by the accused and removed from his house. PW9
recorded the statement (Ex.PF) into writing and read over the
same to the witness whereafter she signed the same in token
of its correctness. He then, made endorsement Ex. PF/2 and
sent the same to the Police Station for recording of formal FIR
(Ex.PF/1). The Investigating Officer, thereafter, went to the
spot and in the house of Ajit Singh, found the dead body of
Dalip Singh. He prepared inquest report Ex.PB and after
drawing up request for post-mortem Ex-PD sent the dead body
to the mortuary through Head Constable Charan Singh and
Constable Sat Pal Singh. He also prepared injury statement
Ex.PC and lifted blood stained earth and took the same into
possession through recovery memo (Ex.PO) which was
attested by SI Kishan Singh and ASI Surinder Kumar. They
went to the house of Dalip Singh and lifted blood stained earth
from the courtyard of the house and that was also taken into
possession through recovery memo Ex.PQ. This recovery
memo was also got attested from the aforesaid witnesses. He
prepared rough site plan Ex. PR and Ex.PG showing the
houses of Ajit Singh and Dalip Singh. The marginal notes
thereof are correct according to the spot. On return to the
police station, he deposited the case property with Moharir HC
with seals intact. Thereafter, he searched for the accused and
on 1.6.1991 when he was present at Bus adda, Talwandi
Phuman, he joined Darshan Singh, PW-5 and left towards
village leharka in search of the accused. When he reached
near the canal minor Darshan Singh pointed out the four
accused and they were apprehended and detained in the case.
In the presence of Darshan Singh and other police officials,
ASI Rajinder Singh interrogated Major Singh who made
disclosure statements (Ex.PL) to the effect that he had kept
concealed a kirpan in the heap of wheat straw which was lying
in his cattle shed and he had the exclusive knowledge about
the same. His statement was reduced into writing and was got
thumb marked by the accused and was got attested from
Darshan Singh and Amrik Singh, PWs. Thereafter, ASI
Rajinder Singh interrogated Jeet Singh who had made
disclosure statement to the effect that he had kept concealed
barchhi in the heap of toori lying in the toori wala kotha and
he had the exclusive knowledge of the same and could get the
same recovered. This statement Ex.PJ was also reduced into
writing and got attested from the aforesaid witnesses.
Thereafter, the accused had led the police party to the place of
concealment already disclosed by them and got discovered
kirpan (Ex.P2) and barchhi (Ex.P1) which were taken into
possession through recovery memo Ex.PM and Ex.PK after
making rough sketches thereof, which are Ex.PN and Ex.PK/1
respectively. The memos, were attested by Darshan Singh and
Amrik Singh, PWs. On return to the police station, the
Investigating Officer deposited the case property in the
malakhana with seals intact. Rough sketches of the places of
discoveries Ex.PT and PU were also prepared during the
investigation and on completion of the same, the challan was
put in the court of Ilaqa Magistrate, against the accused.
Charge sheet was filed after completion of investigation.
Accused persons pleaded innocence.
3. Placing reliance on the evidence of PW4, informant, thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 4
trial Court found the accused persons guilty and convicted
and sentenced, as aforesaid. The main stand of the accused
persons before the trial Court were (a) there was a delay in
lodging the FIR (b) the injuries on the accused were not
explained and (c) evidence of the complainant PW4, eye
witness, was at variance with medical evidence and (d) there
was no trail of blood seen by the Investigating Officer, though
the complainant stated about the presence of a trail of blood
when the accused persons dragged the deceased to the house
of Ajit Singh alias Jeet Singh. The trial court negatived each of
the contentions holding as follows:
(a) there was no delay in lodging the FIR as no
person came to rescue the deceased and, therefore,
the helpless lady, PW4 could not have come to the
police station in the night.
(b) injuries on the accused were not grievous in
nature and could be self inflicted.
(c) statement of eye witness/complainant, PW4
corroborates the medical evidence.
(d) Lack of trail of blood has been explained.
4. In spite of lengthy cross-examination it remained
unshattered. The complainant had nothing to gain by
implicating the accused. Recovery of weapons at the instance
of the accused has been established. If any of the accused was
injured by unidentified assailants as claimed, there was no
reason for them not to report the matter to the Police and kept
mum.
5. Being aggrieved, accused persons filed appeal before the
High Court. The stands before the trial Court were reiterated
before the High Court. By the impugned judgment, the High
Court found that the trial court’s judgment was unsustainable
and accordingly set aside the conviction and sentence imposed
by the trial Court and directed acquittal. Hence, State has filed
the present appeals by special leave.
6. In support of appeals, learned counsel for the appellant
submitted that the High Court has erroneously come to hold
that there was delay in lodging the FIR. The High Court
wrongly concluded that in the FIR or in the statement in court
the delay was not explained. This is clearly contrary to the
factual position. In fact, there was no requirement for
explaining the delay in lodging the FIR by giving details. In any
event, that criticism is not factually correct. So far as non-
explanation of injuries on the accused persons is concerned,
the accused persons never claimed that they suffered injuries
at the hands of the deceased. Therefore, the question of
explaining the injuries did not arise. Finally, the trial court, by
an elaborate analysis, indicated as to why there could not be
trail of blood, as stated by PW4.
7. In response, learned counsel for the respondents
submitted that PW4’s presence on the spot was doubtful. The
High Court has rightly referred to the background of the
deceased and the motivation for false implication of the
respondents. It is submitted that the High Court’s judgment
being one of the acquittal, there is no scope for interference in
these appeals.
8. As submitted by learned counsel for the appellant,
three factors weighed with the High Court for acquitting the
respondents. Firstly, the alleged non- explanation of delay in
presentation of the FIR. The High Court has wrongly recorded
that there was no explanation for the delay in lodging the FIR.http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 4
There was no requirement for offering any such explanation.
Even otherwise, in the FIR it has been categorically stated that
nobody came forward to accompany the complainant to the
police station in the dark night. Therefore, she had to wait till
the morning to come to the police station. In the cross-
examination to this witness, no question regarding the reason
for the alleged delay in lodging the FIR was asked, though, the
witness was cross-examined at length. There was not even a
suggestion that she had wrongly stated about the reason as to
why she was lodging the FIR on the next morning. The
conclusion of the High Court is, therefore, clearly
unsustainable.
9. Next comes the conclusion of the High Court relating to
the alleged non-explanation of the injuries on the accused. It
was not the case of the accused, nor even in their cross-
examination under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (for short ’the Code’), that they were
assaulted by the deceased. It was not the defence version that
the accused persons had suffered injuries at the hands of the
deceased. Their clear case was that they have been falsely
implicated and the killing was done by unidentified assailants
because of the bad reputation of the deceased. They claimed to
have sustained injuries at the hands of the unidentified
assailants when they tried to intervene. As rightly observed by
the trial Court, if they had really sustained injuries in that
manner, the least that could have done was to report the
matter to the police. Admittedly, that was not done. Since the
accused did not claim to have suffered injuries at the hands of
the deceased, the question of explaining the injuries on the
accused in that sense did not arise. Here again the conclusion
of the High Court is clearly unsustainable.
10. The last question relates to the Investigating Officer’s
evidence that he did not find trail of blood. The trial court on
analysing the evidence noticed that since the accused persons
were dragging the dead body of the deceased to the house of
the accused Ajit Singh alias Jeet Singh, there was possibility
of their clothes being strained with blood rather than leaving
trail of blood. The Investigating Officer has categorically stated
that he had collected blood stained earth from several places.
Therefore, it is not a case where there is absence of blood at
the spot of occurrence or nearby. This aspect has been
completely lost sight by the High Court. It is not even
discussed as to why it did not concur with the view of the trial
court in this regard.
11. Looking from any angle the impugned judgment of the
High Court directing acquittal of the respondents is clearly
unsustainable. The same is set aside. The order of the trial
court is restored. Respondents who are on bail shall be taken
into custody forthwith to serve out the remaining sentence.
12. The appeals are allowed accordingly.