REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 957 OF 2023
Central Bureau of Investigation …Appellant
Versus
Vikas Mishra @ Vikash Mishra …Respondent
J U D G M E N T
M.R. SHAH, J.
1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the
impugned judgment and order dated 30.09.2022 passed
by the High Court of Calcutta in Criminal Miscellaneous
Application No. 1638/2022, by which the Division Bench
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 1 of 14of the High Court has directed to release the respondent –
accused on statutory/default bail under Section 167(2) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr.P.C.), the Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has preferred the present
appeal.
2. The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell
are as under:
That on 27.11.2020, an FIR/complaint came to be
registered by the CBI (ACB, Kolkata) against inter alia the
officials of Eastern Coalfield Limited, CISF, Railways and
others for the commission of offences under sections
120B/409 of the IPC and the relevant provisions of the
Prevention of Corruption Act. That on 16.04.2021, the
respondent – accused Vikas Mishra came to be arrested
by the CBI and was remanded to the CBI custody for a
period of seven days i.e., till 22.04.2021. However, during
the said period of remand to CBI custody, the respondent
– accused Vikas Mishra was admitted in the hospital and
thus could not be interrogated by the CBI despite police
custody remand.
2.1 That on 21.04.2021, the respondent-accused was
enlarged on interim bail by the learned Special Court
which came to be extended from time to time. On
08.12.2021, the learned Special Court cancelled the
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 2 of 14interim bail of the respondent-accused on the ground that
he did not appear before the Special Court despite
specific directions and also did not cooperate with the CBI
investigation. That on 09.12.2021 and pursuant to the
interim bail being cancelled, the respondent-accused
came to be arrested again on 11.12.2021 and was
remanded to judicial custody. That again from 12.12.2021
to 08.04.2022, while in judicial custody, the accused got
admitted to the hospital and then again from 07.05.2022
to 08.09.2022.
2.2 That the accused submitted an application for
default bail under Section 167(2) Cr.P.C. on the ground of
non-filing of the charge sheet/report within the prescribed
period of 90 days. The learned Special Judge rejected
the said application inter alia on the ground that the
accused was not remanded to custody under Section
167(2) Cr.P.C. after cancellation of his bail on the grounds
that the accused was granted interim bail under the
provisions of Chapter XXXIII Cr.P.C. and his detention
pursuant to cancellation of bail was on the strength of
warrants issued by the Court. That on 19.07.2022, the
CBI filed a charge sheet against the accused and the
cognizance was taken by the learned Special Court on the
same date.
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 3 of 142.3 Against the judgment and order passed by the
learned Special Judge rejecting the application submitted
by the accused – Vikas Mishra for statutory/default bail
under Section 167(2) Cr.P.C., the respondent-accused
preferred the present application before the High Court.
By the impugned judgment and order, the High Court has
allowed the said application and has directed to release
the respondent on statutory/default bail under Section
167(2) Cr.P.C. as even within 90 days from the date of re-
arrest, i.e., from 11.12.2021, the charge sheet was not
filed and which came to be filed only on 19.07.2022.
Against the impugned judgment and order passed by the
High Court directing to release the respondent-accused
Vikas Mishra on statutory/default bail, the CBI has
preferred the present appeal.
3. While issuing notice on 27.02.2023, this Court
passed the following order:
“Issue notice to consider the prayer of the
Investigating Agency to have the custodial
interrogation of the accused, making it returnable on
13.03.2023.
Shri Rajat Sehgal, learned counsel accepts notice
on behalf of the respondent, who is on caveat.
To be notified within first ten items.”
4. Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG appearing on
behalf of the CBI has vehemently submitted that as such
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 4 of 14the CBI got the police custody remand for a period of
seven days on 16.04.2021 till 22.04.2021. It is submitted
that however the accused got himself first admitted to
hospital and thereafter got interim bail which came to be
subsequently cancelled on 08.12.2021, the CBI could not
exercise the police custody remand which as such was
allowed by the learned Special Judge on 16.04.2021.
4.1 It is submitted that as such the order granting seven
days police custody remand attained finality and therefore
the CBI should be given the police custody remand of the
accused for the remainder period of seven days.
4.2 It is submitted that as such all throughout the
respondent-accused managed to get himself hospitalised
on one ground or the other and therefore as such
successfully frustrated the order of police remand allowed
by the learned Special Judge. It is submitted that nobody
can be permitted to frustrate the court’s process.
4.3 Making above submissions, it is prayed to grant the
police custody remand of the respondent-accused for the
remainder period of seven days which the CBI could not
exercise because of the respondent got himself
hospitalised and was released on interim bail.
5. The present application and the prayer of the CBI
for further police custody remand is vehemently opposed
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 5 of 14by Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned Senior Counsel
appearing on behalf of the respondent – accused.
5.1 Relying upon the decisions of this Court in the case
of Central Bureau of Investigation v. Anupam J.
Kulkarni, reported in (1992) 3 SCC 141 and the
subsequent decision in the case of Budh Singh v. State
of Punjab, reported in (2000) 9 SCC 266, it is
vehemently submitted by Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul,
learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
accused that as such no police custody can be
granted/allowed beyond the first 15 days from the date of
arrest. It is submitted that therefore now the police
custody which shall be beyond the period of 15 days from
the date of arrest is not permissible.
5.2 It is further submitted that even otherwise in the
present case the respondent-accused was hospitalised
from time to time due to his grave and fragile medical
condition. That on 18.04.2021, the health of the
respondent heavily deteriorated due to which he had to be
admitted in the hospital by the appellant agency itself. It
is submitted that thereafter on 20.04.2021 he was
transferred to another hospital – a government hospital for
better treatment and medical facilities. It is submitted that
therefore there is no substance in the submission on
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 6 of 14behalf of the investigating agency that on 18.04.2021 the
accused got himself admitted to the hospital to evade his
custody.
5.3 It is further submitted that even otherwise between
08.04.2022 to 18.04.2022 when the respondent was
remanded to police custody in another case, during that
time, he was extensively interrogated in the present RC
as well. It is submitted that even while on interim bail the
respondent accused was interrogated. It is submitted that
therefore the prayer on behalf of the CBI made now to
have the police custody of the respondent-accused may
not be granted.
5.4 Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned senior counsel
appearing on behalf of the accused has drawn our
attention to the pendency of the Special Leave
Petition(Criminal) Nos. 1620-1621/2021 filed by the co-
accused in which the investigation by the CBI itself is
under challenge and this Court passed an interim order
that no coercive steps be taken against the petitioner of
that special leave petition.
5.5 Making above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss
the present appeal.
6. We have heard learned counsel for the respective
parties at length.
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 7 of 14While considering the prayer of the CBI for police
custody for the remainder period of seven days, it is
required to be noted that as such the learned Special
Judge granted seven days police custody of the
respondent-accused on 16.04.2021. The order granting
seven days police custody as such had attained finality.
However, it so happened that before the seven days
police custody is over and before the CBI exercises the
power of interrogation for full seven days which as per the
order passed by the learned Special Judge was available
to the CBI, the respondent-accused got himself
hospitalised on 18.04.2021. On 21.04.2021, the learned
Special Judge granted interim bail to the accused. As per
the settled position of law therefore once on bail/interim
bail, during that period there cannot be any police
custody. Therefore, the CBI could not interrogate the
respondent-accused for full seven days under the police
custody remand, which otherwise the CBI was entitled to.
That thereafter, the accused remained in the hospital from
time to time during the interim bail which also came to be
extended from time to time. That thereafter, by order
dated 08.12.2021, the learned Special Judge cancelled
the interim bail by observing that the respondent accused
has misused the interim bail and has not cooperated with
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 8 of 14the CBI in investigation and that there was no valid reason
for his hospitalisation. The learned Special Judge also
observed that in view of the non-cooperation by the
accused, the interrogation of the accused under judicial
custody/police custody has necessitated. Some of the
observations made by the learned Special Judge made in
the order dated 08.12.2021 cancelling the interim bail are
relevant, which are as under:
“Heard both sides, perused the materials in the CD and in
the case record and considered.
Following propositions were submitted and seems to be
admitted that neither the accused person has attempted to tamper
any evidence nor he is likely to flee from justice. The only aspect on
which the present prayer under adjudication seems to be banked
upon is that the accused person willfully halted the progress of the
investigation by not cooperating the investigating agency during his
attendances before them. For that I am here to decipher how
genuine the allegation is and as to whether such alleged non-
cooperation on the part of this accused person is a sufficient ground
to curb his bailed freedom and commit him back to custody invoking
section 437(5) Cr. P.C. I have carefully gone through the transcribed
conversations on different dates between the 10 and this accused
person while on bail and the 10. The answers given to questions
put to him are by no means in the direction of corroborating the
contents of the documentary evidence collected by the 10 during
the investigation. The statements of the witnesses recorded u/s 161
and 164 Cr. P.C. and the documentary evidence like account
statements etc. collected disclose direct involvement of this
accused person in transmitting huge sums, to yet unknown or
unidentifiable entities. This money trail also bears a direct linkage to
the other FIR named accused persons, whether or not public
servants, as it transpires from the CD. Any man of common
prudence would understand that unless these details are elicited
the investigation would be badly hampered and the total truth will
never be unearthed. In such circumstances I feel that judicial
detention and custodial interrogation of the accused person have to
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 9 of 14be resorted to. I also am convinced to say that this non-cooperation
is consciously active and pre-designed and this is sufficient to
presume willful misuse of liberty of bail on the part of the accused
person which he obtained exclusively on medical ground. In my
appreciation allowing furtherance of this liberty would certainly
defeat the cause of public justice. The nature and seriousness of
the offence, the character of evidence collected before and after the
interim bail was granted as against this accused person, the
present circumstances and shown gesture of designed reluctance
of the accused person in assisting the investigation to progress, and
the larger interest of the public and the nation - all at a time, impel
me to jump to the judicial inference that the accused person should
no more be allowed to enjoy the liberty of the interim bail granted to
him on 21.04.2021 and which has been extended from time to time
till date. The precedents relied upon by the Ld. Advocates for the
accused person are all dissimilar to the factual matrix of the present
case and hence require no separate mentioning. So far as the
present health condition of the accused person is concerned from
the documents supplied on behalf of the accused person, it is
definitely evident that his health is in condition than what he was in
at the time of obtaining the Interim Bail, of course with advice by the
doctors to keep away from physical and mental stress. But only that
should not save him from the rigours of incarceration which he was
supposed to be in, had the illness of that not there at the time of
getting magnitude been not person the interim bail. There is nothing
in the medical documents to assume that the accused is not fit
enough to move, think or talk properly, as was urged by the Ld.
Advocate for the accused person. In the contrary it is found that the
accused person is suffering from cirrhosis of liver since before this
case was initiated and there had been ups and downs in his health
condition. For that this court cannot let the truth submerge in the
plea of his chronic ailments.
Coming to the medical reports submitted today it is found
that today at 12.10 am he shifted himself to Apollo Hospital where
he was examined and was readily admitted in some medically
unspecified ward (Deluxe) under treatment of a specialist
pulmonologist. Notable that the documents produced show that the
emergency admission advice form has been struck down by hand
making it a direct admission advice form and the bed number there
is also illegible due to repeated overwriting. The admission form
submitted shows that expected length of stay of the patient at the
hospital is nil. Even if it is accepted that the accused person is
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 10 of 14admitted in hospital for a suspected pulmonary tract infection, that
does not take away the adverse inferences already drawn by this
court hereinabove. For the sake of precise investigation coercive
participation of the accused person by way of judicial detention now
appears to be imminent and indispensable.”
7. In light of the aforesaid facts and circumstances and
the observations made by the learned Special Judge
while cancelling the interim bail, the decision of this Court
in the case of Anupam J. Kulkarni (supra) is required to
be considered.
7.1 It is true that in the case of Anupam J. Kulkarni
(supra), this Court observed that there cannot be any
police custody beyond 15 days from the date of arrest. In
our opinion, the view taken by this Court in the case of
Anupam J. Kulkarni (supra) requires re-consideration.
When we put a very pertinent question to Shri Neeraj
Kishan Kaul, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf
of the respondent-accused that in a given case it may
happen that the learned trial/Special Court refuses to
grant the police custody erroneously which as such was
prayed within 15 days and/or immediately on the date of
arrest and thereafter the order passed by the trial/Special
Court is challenged by the investigating agency before the
higher Court, namely, Sessions Court or the High Court
and the higher Court reverses the decision of the learned
Magistrate refusing to grant the police custody and by that
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 11 of 14time the period of 15 days is over, what would be
position? The learned senior counsel is not in a position to
answer the court query.
8. Be that as it may, the facts in the present case are
very glaring. Despite the fact that on 16.04.2021, the
learned Special Judge allowed police custody of the
respondent-accused for seven days i.e., up to 22.04.2021,
the respondent-accused got himself admitted in the
hospital during the period of police custody, i.e., on
18.04.2021 and obtained interim bail on 21.04.2021 which
came to be extended till 08.12.2021 when his interim bail
came to be cancelled by the learned Special Judge by
observing that the accused has misused the liberty shown
to him and during the interim bail he has not cooperated
with the investigating agency. At the cost of repetition, it is
observed that initial order of grant of seven days police
custody attained finality. However, due to the aforesaid
reasons of having got the accused himself hospitalised on
18.04.2021 and thereafter obtaining the interim bail on
21.04.2021, the CBI could not interrogate the accused in
the police custody though having a valid order in its
favour. Thus, the respondent-accused has successfully
avoided the full operation of the order of police custody
granted by the learned Special Judge. No accused can
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 12 of 14be permitted to play with the investigation and/or the
court’s process. No accused can be permitted to frustrate
the judicial process by his conduct. It cannot be disputed
that the right of custodial interrogation/investigation is also
a very important right in favour of the investigating agency
to unearth the truth, which the accused has purposely and
successfully tried to frustrate. Therefore, by not permitting
the CBI to have the police custody interrogation for the
remainder period of seven days, it will be giving a
premium to an accused who has been successful in
frustrating the judicial process.
9. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the
accused about the pendency of Special Leave Petition
(Criminal) Nos. 1620-1621/2021 by the co-accused before
this Court and the interim order that “no coercive steps be
taken against the petitioner therein” is concerned, it is
required to be noted that the pendency of the special
leave petitions at the behest of the co-accused has
nothing to do with the present proceedings. It is required
to be noted that the accused in the present case - Vikas
Mishra in fact filed a similar special leave petition,
however, this Court declined to grant the permission to the
respondent-accused to file the special leave petition by
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 13 of 14reserving liberty in his favour to pursue the remedies
which were available in law.
10. In view of the above and for the reasons stated
above, the present appeal succeeds. The appellant-CBI
is permitted to have the police custody remand of the
respondent for a period of four days (taking into
consideration that pursuant to order dated 16.04.2021
passed by the learned Special Judge the police custody
remand of seven days of the respondent-accused was
granted, however for the reasons stated above, the CBI
could interrogate the respondent-accused only for a
period of two and half days and therefore could not
exercise the right of interrogation for the full period of
seven days of police custody remand).
11. The instant appeal is accordingly allowed to the
aforesaid extent.
……………………………J.
[M.R. SHAH]
NEW DELHI; ……………………………J.
APRIL 10, 2023. [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]
Criminal Appeal No. 957/2023 Page 14 of 14