REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.5616 OF 2004
Radha Mudaliyar … Appellant
Versus
Spl. Tahsildar (Land ACQ.),
T.N.H. Board …
Respondent
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO.5628 OF 2004
Dhanapooshanam … Appellant
Versus
Special Tahsildar (L.A.), Chennai & Anr. …
Respondents
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO.5732 OF 2004
N. Thananchayan … Appellant
Versus
Special Tahsildar (L.A.) Chennai & Anr. …
RespondentsWITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8818 OF 2010
(Arising out of SLP (C) No.9736 of 2004)
K. Gomathi & Ors. … Appellants
Versus
Special Tahsildar (L.A.), Madras & Anr. …
Respondents
J U D G M E N T
Swatanter Kumar, J.
1. Leave granted in SLP (C) No.9736 of 2004.
2. Application for impleadment in Civil Appeal No.5616 of
2004 is allowed.
3. By this judgment, we will dispose of the three Civil
Appeals being Civil Appeal Nos.5616, 5628 and 5732 of 2004
and a Civil Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (C)
No.9736 of 2004 as they arise from a common judgment withsomewhat similar facts.
FACTS
4. For the purposes of brevity and to avoid repetition, we
would be referring to the facts in Civil Appeal No.5616 of 2004.
A notification under Section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act,
1894 (for short, ‘the Act’) was issued by the Industries
Department of the State of Tamil Nadu on 23.01.1985 to
acquire land in the Revenue Estate of village Kadaperi, Hamlet
of Tambaram, Tambaram Taluk within the municipal limits of
the city including the land admeasuring 7.06 acres belonging
to the appellant. This notification came to be issued in
furtherance of the scheme, which was sanctioned by the State
Industries Promotion Corporation of Tamil Nadu (SIPCOT) on
03.04.1984 and a total of 261.42 acres of land was acquired
for setting up the Madras Export Processing Zone (MEPZ). The
entire land, including dry and wet lands, was sought to be
acquired as a compact block for the project in question. In
response to the publication of the notification, the interested
persons filed objections in terms of Section 5A of the Act whichwere considered by the Land Acquisition Officer (for short, the
‘LAO’) and declaration under Section 6 of the Act was issued
on 23.04.1986. After notice to the interested persons/owners,
Award No. 3/86 was made and published by the LAO on
28.11.1986. The LAO awarded compensation at the rate of
` 145/- per cent for an extent of 64 cents and ` 110 for 6.42
acres of another kind of land and also awarded compensation
at different rates for the superstructures raised by the
appellants on their respective lands. The possession of the
land was taken on 03.02.1987. The compensation was
received by the appellants under protest on 04.07.1987 and
they preferred references under Section 18 of the Act.
According to the appellants, the market price of the land in
question was between ` 7,000/- and ` 8,000/- per cent in the
years 1983-84. In 1985-86 the land was sold at the rate of `
45,000/- to ` 50,000/- per ground. In this appeal, the
appellants had claimed compensation at that rate. They also
stated that they had raised nearly 160 coconut trees and dug
a big well fitted with electric motor by incurring a cost of ` 1.5
lakh on the land in question. We may notice that variousappellants had raised different claims on these grounds. The
Collector, as already noticed, had awarded compensation
uniformly at the rates mentioned supra while awarding
compensation separately for the well, trees, etc.
5. The parties led evidence before the Reference Court
and the Reference Court, vide its judgment dated 09.12.1988,
enhanced the compensation payable to the claimants to
`3,600/- per cent as agricultural land by relying upon Exhibits
A1, A4 and A5. The Reference Court granted the following
relief to the claimants:
“1) The valuation fixed by the lands acquired at
Rs.110/- and Rs.145/- per cent, by the Land
Acquisition Officer has been raised and a fresh
valuation at Rs.3,600/- per cent is fixed for the entire
area of the acquired lands;
2) The valuation at Rs.2,675/- per coconut tree,
fixed by the Land Acquisition Tahsildar is held to be
correct and confirmed;
3) The valuation for the well and the pump-set
made by the Land Acquisition Tahsildar at
Rs.44,487/- has been enhanced to Rs.1,76,862/- and
fixed accordingly;
4) Further it is ordered that the claimant should
be paid 30% solatium for the above amounts and
interest at the rate of 12% from 23.1.1985 to
28.11.1986 and further 9% interest from 3.2.1987 to2.2.1988. It is ordered that the sum of
Rs.1,88,887.85 fixed as compensation by the Land
Acquisition Tahsildar for the land, trees, well and
pump-set should be deducted from the above
amount. It is further ordered that the claimant is
entitled to the interest at the rate of 15% per annum
for the difference amount of compensation from
3.2.1988 till date of deposit of the compensation into
Court.”
6. Aggrieved by the said judgment of the Reference Court,
the Government, through the LAO, filed an appeal before the
High Court challenging the correctness of the same. The High
Court, vide its judgment dated 05.02.2001, declined to accept
the reasoning recorded by the Reference Court in its different
judgments under appeal and reduced the compensation
payable to the claimants at the rate of ` 2018/- per cent.
Thus, the High Court, while partially accepting the appeal of
the State, granted the following relief:
“Therefore, considering the fact the lands under
acquisition are not developed at all, whereas, under
adjoining lands are developed, deduction at the rate of
40% for prescribing the correct value by the learned
Judge cannot be held to be erroneous. Therefore, we
are of the considered view that the market value of the
acquired lands can be determined by adopting the
value as per Ex.A4, i.e. Rs.3,363/-, and after a
deduction of 40% towards development charges, the
market value will be Rs.2,018/- per cent. The
claimant is entitled to compensation for the 7.06acres of acquired lands at this rate, i.e., 14,24,708/-.”
7. Before discussing the merits in these appeals, it needs
to be noticed that different sale instances were produced as
exhibits in different references. As far as the question of
enhancing the compensation awarded to the claimants on
account of trees, well and other improvements on the land in
question is concerned, we may notice that it is apparent from
the record of the case as well as the arguments addressed
before this Court that the correctness of the compensation
awarded by the Reference Court was hardly questioned before
the High Court and even before this Court. As there is no
serious challenge to the quantum of compensation awarded on
this account, we do not propose to discuss this issue any
further. Thus, only two issues have been raised before us,
namely: (a) that the High Court has not appreciated the
evidence on record in its correct perspective. The High Court
has applied deduction of 40% which, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, is not called for. This has resulted
in serious prejudice to the interest of the claimants and they
have not been awarded the fair market value of their acquiredlands; and (b) they have not been awarded solatium and
interest in accordance with law.
DISCUSSION ON MERITS
8. In Civil Appeal No.5616 of 2004, the claimant is the
owner of land admeasuring 7.06 acres in a compact square
shape falling in Survey Nos.16 and 24/1 in the Revenue Estate
of Kadaperi village. Exhibits A1, A4 and A5 are the sale
instances from the same village which had been produced by
the claimant in support of her claim. Exhibits A2 and A3 are
the valuation reports in relation to the well and the pump on
the acquired land. Exhibit A6 is the photo copy of Kadaperi
village map. Exhibits A1, A4 and A5 are dated 7th November
1984, 12th March 1984 and 15th June 1984 respectively. The
Reference Court appears to have firstly relied upon Exhibit A5
and while assuming that value of the land under this exhibit
was ` 6,000/- per cent then proceeded to apply 40% deduction
on account of road facilities and the fact that these were the
sale instances relating to plots and resultantly awarded `
3,600/- per cent as the compensation payable to theclaimants. Reference was also made to Exhibit A4 where the
land had been sold at the rate of ` 4,545/- per cent. The Court
noticed that value of the land had been increasing in the area
day-by- day and various facilities such as school, college,
hospital and banks were available quite near the acquired land
and even a Railway Station was located within a distance of
one kilometer. While taking Exhibit A4 as the basis, the
Reference Court erred in adding 40% increase to the reflected
value in the sale deed. The error is due to the reasons that
actual sale consideration of Exhibit A4 was ` 3363 per cent
and the intervening period between the date of the sale deed
and issuance of notification under Section 4 was not two years
as noticed by that Court. Though the compensation was
determined primarily on the basis of Exhibit A4, the learned
Reference Court noticed that the land in Exhibit A5 had been
sold at the rate of Rs.6,000/- per cent under that document.
This impression of the Reference Court is not supported by
any evidence on record as under Exhibit A5 the land was, in
fact, sold at the rate of ` 2,180/- per cent on 15.06.1984.
However, the learned Reference Court computed somewhatsimilar compensation with reference to the two Exhibits A4
and A5. It may be noticed that Exhibit A4 is three months
prior to the date of execution of Exhibit A5.
9. In Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 9736 of 2004,
the Tahsildar vide Award No.5 of 1986 dated 29.11.1986 had
fixed the compensation at ` 145.85 per cent on the basis of
Exhibits A2 and A3 respectively. These documents, as well as
Exhibit A4 were considered to be inadmissible by the
Reference Court in its order dated 18.11.1990 and rejected as
they were neither the original sale deeds nor copies of
registered documents. The rejection thereof is not questioned
in the present appeals. The Court had primarily relied upon
Exhibit A1 and awarded the compensation. The High Court,
while adopting the reasoning given in its judgment in Civil
Appeal No. 5616 of 2004, reduced the compensation relying
upon Exhibit A4 in that case and after making 40% deduction
awarded the compensation.
10. In the backdrop of the above factual matrix and the
judgments of the Courts under appeal, this Court imprimushas to examine as to what would be the just and fair market
value of the land on the basis of which the compensation
payable to the claimants should be determined in terms of
Section 23 of the Act. It is a well settled principle of law that
comparable sale instances, subject to their satisfying the basic
ingredients of law, are the best piece of evidence to be
considered by the Court for the purpose of determining the
compensation. Even awards and transactions of the adjacent
areas have been treated as best evidence which will fall within
the zone of consideration by the Court. Of course, such
instances must be comparable and legally admissible in
evidence. In this aspect, we may refer to the judgments of this
Court in the case of Harcharan v. State of Haryana, [(1982) 3
SCC 408]; Kantaben Manibhai Amin vs. Special Land
Acquisition Officer, Baroda, [(1989) 4 SCC 662] and ONGC Ltd.
vs. Sendhabhai Vastram Patel, [(2005) 6 SCC 454].
Comparable sale instances are the safest method for
determining the market value of the acquired land and as laid
down in Shaji Kuriakose vs. Indian Oil Corporation, [(2001) 7
SCC 650], it should satisfy the factors, inter alia, (1) the salemust be genuine transaction; (2) the sale deed must have been
executed at the time proximate to the date of issuance of
notification under Section 4 of the Act; (3) the land covered by
the sale must be in vicinity of the acquired land; (4) the land
covered by the sale must be similar to the acquired land; and
(5) size of the plot of the land covered by the sale be
comparable to the acquired land. The sale instances should
preferably be closest to the date of the notification as then
alone it would satisfy the touchstone of the principles
contemplated under Section 23 of the Act, as held in Kanwar
Singh vs. Union of India, [(1998) 8 SCC 136].
11. In Civil Appeal No.5616 of 2004, three sale instances
were produced and proved by the claimants on the record of
the Reference Court. These are Exhibit A1, A4 and A5 and
their details are as follows :
E D A S T V P
XHIBIT ATE OF REA OLD OTAL SALE ALUE ER
S D C C
ALE EED ONSIDERATION ENT
A1 07.11.1984 5 Cents ` 20,000 ` 4,000/-
A5 15.06.1984 4.13 Cents ` 9,000 ` 2,180/-
A4 12.03.1984 5.5 Cents ` 18,500 ` 3,363/-It needs to be noticed that all these lands are located
in the Revenue Estate of the same village from where the land
has been acquired. The land, subject matter of Exhibit A4 is
located in Survey No.165 and, as apparent from the above
table, admeasuring approximately 5.5 cents was sold for a
sum of `18,500/- and the rate comes to ` 3,363/- per cent.
However, it is in evidence that when this document was
presented for registration, the concerned Registrar made an
endorsement raising an objection with regard to the sale
consideration declared in the sale deed. According to the
Registrar, Mark A5 was the endorsement vide which the
parties were directed to pay stamp duty taking the value of
the land in question to be ` 25,000/-. The total sale
consideration being ` 25,000/-, the rate of the land would
come to ` 4,545/- per cent. This document was registered as
per endorsement on record on 15.6.1984 while the date of the
presentation and execution of the sale deed was 12.3.1984.
We would not like to go into the question whether as per
Exhibit A4 the sale consideration should be ` 18,500/- or it
should be ` 25,000/-. The question as to what is the effect ofenhancement of the sale consideration by the Registrar for the
purpose of payment of stamp duty, on the market value of the
acquired land while determining the compensation payable to
the claimants, need not be examined by us. In this case, the
same is specifically kept open. For the purposes of the present
case, we would take the value of the land at the rate of ` 3,363
per cent.
Exhibits A1 and A5 again are the sale instances from
the same Revenue Estate and are quite close to the date of
notification under Section 4, Exhibit A1 is dated 7.11.1984
while Exhibit A5 is dated 15.6.1984. None of the parties to the
proceedings have questioned the genuineness, legality or
otherwise of these documents and, in fact, as it appears from
the record before us there is hardly any objection regarding
their admissibility or being read in evidence.
12. Now, let us examine whether Exhibits A1, A4 and A5
satisfy the above stated tests. They were admitted in evidence
in accordance with law as they are genuine transactions and
are the closest sale instances to the date of the notification as
available on record and the land, subject matter of thetransaction, is quite similar to the acquired land and, in fact,
it is from the same village. Of course, the area, stated in these
sale instances, is comparatively much smaller in size than the
acquired land. The sale deed is dated 12.03.1984 while the
notification under Section 4 was issued on 23.01.1985. Thus,
there is a difference of nearly ten months between these two
dates. The claimants would be entitled to the benefit of
increase for this intervening period. Annual increase of 10%
to 15% is normally allowed by the court where the record
reflects increasing trend in the sale price of the land. This
principle is often applied by this Court while determining
compensation. Reference can be made to the judgments of
this Court in ONGC Ltd. vs. Rameshbhai Jivanbhai Patel
[(2008) 14 SCC 745] and Sardar Jogendra Singh (dead) by LRs.
vs. State of Uttar Pradesh [(2008) 17 SCC 133]. We have opted
to apply the minimum increase possible because of the short
intervening period between the execution of the sale deed and
issuance of notification under Section 4. Consequence of the
above addition would be that the value of the land in terms of
Exhibit A4 as on the date of the notification under Section 4would be ` 3,699/- per cent rounded off to ` 3,700/- per cent
which, when reasonable deduction is applied, would give more
or less the same rate of compensation as computed by us on
the basis of Exhibit A1.
13. Now, the next question that arises is whether the
claimants would be entitled to receive the compensation at
this rate or certain element of deduction needs to be applied in
the facts and circumstances of the case. The deduction can be
applied for different aspects while determining compensation.
If the size of the plot is very small and the same has to be
taken into consideration for non-availability of other evidence
and where the land acquired is a large chunk of land, then it
would be advisable to apply some deduction on that score.
Reference in this regard may be made to Land Acquisition
Officer vs. Nookala Rajamallu [(2003) 12 SCC 334]. In
alternative or in addition thereto, deduction can also be
applied on account of wastage of land and development
charges. In the present case, the land has been acquired,
which apparently was an agricultural land at the time of
acquisition, to carry out the development scheme for the MEPZsanctioned by the SIPCOT. The development purpose, being in
public interest, is bound to result in utilization of part of the
land for the purposes of roads, by-links, water & electricity
lines and other infrastructural amenities of the project. This
Court, depending on the facts and circumstances of the case,
has taken the view that deduction on account of expenses of
development of the sites could vary from 20% to 70%
depending on the nature of the land, its situation, the purpose
and stage of development as held by this Court in the case of
K.S. Shivadevamma vs. Assistant Commissioner and Land
Acqusition Officer [(1996) 2 SCC 62], Ram Piari vs. Land
Acquisition Collector, Solan [(1996) 8 SCC 338], Chimanlal
Hargovindas vs. Special Land Acquisition Officer, Poona [(1988)
3 SCC 751], Hasanali Walimchand (Dead) by Lrs.
vs. State of Maharashtra [(1998) 2 SCC 388[. In K.S.
Shivadevamma (supra), this Court held as under:
“10. It is then contended that 53% is not automatic
but depends upon the nature of the development and
the stage of development. We are inclined to agree
with the learned counsel that the extent of deduction
depends upon development need in each case. Under
the Building Rules 53% of land is required to be left
out. This Court has laid as a general rule that forlaying the roads and other amenities 33-1/3% is
required to be deducted. Where the development has
already taken place, appropriate deduction needs to
be made. In this case, we do not find any development
had taken place as on that date. When we are
determining compensation under Section 23(1), as on
the date of notification under Section 4(1), we have to
consider the situation of the land development, if
already made, and other relevant facts as on that
date. No doubt, the land possessed potential value,
but no development had taken place as on the date,
In view of the obligation on the part of the owner to
hand over the land to the City Improvement Trust for
roads and for other amenities and his requirement to
expend money for laying the roads, water supply
mains, electricity etc., the deduction of 53% and
further deduction towards development charges @ 33-
1/3%, ordered by the High Court, was not illegal.”
The above view was reiterated in the case of Nookala
Rajamallu (supra).
14. On similar lines, this Court in the case of V.
Hanumantha Reddy (Deceased) by Lrs. vs. Land Acquisition
Officer & Mandal R. Officer [(2003) 12 SCC 642], while
considering that the acquired land was adjacent to developed
land, held that neither its high potentiality nor its proximity to
a developed land can be a ground for not deducting the
development charges and that normally 1/3rd deduction could
be allowed.15. We may also notice that the Courts would have to
apply some guess work while determining such a question
inasmuch as it is not always possible to determine the
quantum of compensation with exactitude or arithmetical
accuracy. Of course, this permissible guess work has to be
used with great caution and within the determinants of law
declared by this Court from time to time. This Court in the
case of Charan Dass (Dead) by Lrs. vs. H.P. Housing and Urban
Development Authority, [2009 (12) SCALE 293] held as under:
“10. Section of the Act mandates that in
15
determining the amount of compensation, the
Collector shall be guided by the provisions contained
in Sections and of the Act. Section provides
23 24 23
that in determining the amount of compensation to
be awarded for the land acquired under the Act, the
Court shall, inter alia, take into consideration the
market value of the land at the date of the
publication of the Notification under Section of the
4
Act. The Section contains the list of positive factors
and Section has a list of negatives, vis-a-vis the
24
land under acquisition, to be taken into
consideration while determining the amount of
compensation. As already noted, the first step being
the determination of the market value of the land on
the date of publication of Notification under Sub-
section (1) of Section of the Act. One of the
4
principles for determination of the market value of
the acquired land would be the price that a willing
purchaser would be willing to pay if it is sold in the
open market at the time of issue of Notification underSection of the Act. But finding direct evidence in
4
this behalf is not an easy task and, therefore, the
Court has to take recourse to other known methods
for arriving at the market value of the land acquired.
One of the preferred and well accepted methods
adopted for ascertaining the market value of the land
in acquisition cases is the sale transactions on or
about the date of issue of Notification under Section
4
of the Act. But here again finding a transaction of
sale on or a few days before the said Notification is
not an easy exercise. In the absence of such evidence
contemporaneous transactions in respect of the
lands, which have similar advantages and
disadvantages is considered as a good piece of
evidence for determining the market value of the
acquired land. It needs little emphasis that the
contemporaneous transactions or the comparable
sales have to be in respect of lands which are
contiguous to the acquired land and are similar in
nature and potentiality. Again, in the absence of sale
deeds, the judgments and awards passed in respect
of acquisition of lands, made in the same village
and/or neighbouring villages can be accepted as
valid piece of evidence and provide a sound basis to
work out the market value of the land after suitable
adjustments with regard to positive and negative
factors enumerated in Sections and of the Act.
23 24
Undoubtedly, an element of some guess work is
involved in the entire exercise, yet the authority
charged with the duty to award compensation is
bound to make an estimate judged by an objective
standard.”
(emphasis supplied)
16. Despite the fact that both the Reference Court as wellas the High Court have relied upon Exhibit A4 or A5 or both of
them, still they have arrived at drastically different rates of
compensation payable to the claimants. While the High Court
took the value of Exhibit A4 as ` 3,363/- per cent, without
adding any element of increase for the intervening period, it
applied deduction at the rate of 40% and awarded
compensation at the rate of ` 2,018/- per cent. On the other
hand the Reference Court took the total sale consideration of
Exhibit A4 as ` 25,000/- in place of ` 18,500/- and applied
40% increase while awarding compensation to the claimants.
Of course, the Reference Court also applied 40% deduction on
account of development charges and taking the gross value at
the rate of ` 6,000/- per cent awarded compensation at the
rate of `3,600/- per cent.
In our considered view, both the Reference Court as well as
the High Court have fallen in error of law in computing the
compensation payable to the claimants. On the one hand, the
High Court ignored an important aspect of the case in not
awarding enhancement in the value of the land as it had come
in evidence that there was increasing trend in the sale price ofthe land in that area. The documentary evidence of Exhibits
A1 and A4 also shows the increasing trend. On the other
hand, the Reference Court fell in error in giving 40% increase
for a short intervening period of ten months. Both the High
Court as well as the Reference Court had applied the
deduction at the rate of 40% but still awarded compensation
at antipodal rates.
Another reason which we must notice and, in fact, it is not
clear to us either from the judgment of the High Court or that
of the Reference Court as to why Exhibit A1 has not been
taken into consideration by both the Courts. In our view,
Exhibit A1 is the sale instance from the Revenue Estate of the
same village and is located close to the developed area. The
sale deed was executed only three months prior to the date of
notification under Section 4 of the Act and also reflected a
reasonable value where the land was sold at the rate of `
4,000/- per cent while as per Exhibit A4, the land was sold at
the rate of ` 3,363/- on 12.3.1984, thus, indicating increasing
trend in the value of the land. If appropriate increase is given
on the basis of Exhibit A4 for the intervening period anddeduction at a reasonable rate less than 40% is applied, it will
approximately give the same rate of compensation as would be
computed with reference to Exhibit A1.
Now, let us examine the exact compensation payable to the
claimants with reference to Exhibit A1. Genuineness of
Exhibit A1 has neither been questioned nor held to be a
transaction which was executed only to enhance the value of
the acquired land. Exhibit A1 is a comparable piece of
evidence which can safely be relied upon by the Court while
determining the compensation in regard to the acquired land.
Learned counsel for the claimants, while relying upon the
judgment of this Court in Kasturi & Ors. vs. State of Haryana
[(2003) 1 SCC 354], contended that the acquired land has
great potential and is located adjacent to the developed land
and as such the deduction should not be more than 20% on
these counts. However, learned counsel appearing for the
respondents relied upon the other judgments already referred
by us supra that the deduction should not be less than 40%.
Having examined the facts and circumstances of the case and
the evidence on record, we are of the considered view that ruleof approximately 1/3rd deduction can be fairly applied to the
present case. The land certainly has potential and even the
sale instances show that the land from the Revenue Estate of
the same village was sold as plots and a number of facilities,
as indicated above, were available in the vicinity. Examining
the cumulative effect of the evidence on record in relation to
location, potential and similarity of land, we consider it
appropriate that deduction of more than 30% would be
prejudicial to the interest of the claimants whose lands have
been acquired by the State in exercise of its power of eminent
domain. It is a compulsory acquisition and it is expected of
the State to be just and fair and award the compensation to
the claimants which satisfies mandate of law contained in the
provisions of Section 23 of the Act. Therefore, applying 30%
deduction to the value indicated in Exhibit A1 (deduction
being made both on account of size of the plot and
development charges), the claimants would be entitled to
receive compensation at the rate of ` 2,800/- per cent for the
acquired land. As in the other appeals, the High Court had
only relied upon its judgment which is impugned in CivilAppeal No.5616 of 2004, therefore, it is not necessary for us to
discuss the evidence in those cases in any further detail. The
claimants in all these appeals would be entitled to the same
rate of compensation.
17. The argument of the appellants is that they have been
denied solatium and interest by the High Court while referring
to the judgment of this Court in Prem Nath Kapur v. National
Fertilizers Corporation of India Ltd. [(1996) 2 SCC 71]. It is
contended that in view of the law clearly stated by this Court
in the case of Sunder v. Union of India [(2001) 7 SCC 211],
which has been consistently followed by different Benches of
this Court, the claimants are entitled to solatium as well as
the interest on the awarded amount. We find merit in this
contention.
18. The Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of
Sunder (supra) had clearly stated that the Court has to keep in
mind that the compulsory nature of acquisition is to be
distinguished from voluntary sale or transfer. In the latter,
there is a willing buyer and seller. In the case of acquisition, it
is compulsory and deprives the owner of an opportunity tonegotiate and bargain the sale price of its land as it will
entirely depend on what the Collector or the court determines
as the amount of compensation in accordance with the
provisions of the Act. The solatium envisaged in sub-section
(2) of Section 23 is “in consideration of the compulsory nature
of acquisition”. Thus, the solatium is not the same as
damages on account of the landowner’s disinclination to part
with the land acquired. If such compensation as determined in
terms of Section 23 of the Act is not paid within one year from
the date of taking possession of the land, then in terms of
proviso to Section 34 interest shall stand escalated to 15% per
annum from the date of the expiry of the said period of one
year on the amount of compensation or part thereof which has
not been paid or deposited before the date of such expiry. The
Court further held that it is inconceivable that the solatium
amount would attract only the escalated rate of interest from
the expiry of one year and that there would be no interest on
solatium during the preceding period. Hence the person
entitled to the compensation awarded is also entitled to get
interest on the aggregate amount including solatium. Itappears from the impugned judgment that the High Court had
relied upon the judgment of this Court in the case of Prem
Nath Kapur (supra) and the judgment of this Court in the case
of Sunder (supra) came to be pronounced after the judgment of
the High Court. While relying upon the law existing at that
time, the High Court had declined to grant the interest on
solatium but made it subject to the pronouncement in the
case of Kapur Chand Jain vs. State of Himanchal Pradesh
[(1999) 2 SCC 89], wherein this Court subsequently made a
reference to a larger Bench and the judgment in Sunder
(supra) came to be pronounced. In any case there can be no
doubt in law that the claimants are entitled to the solatium
and the interest thereupon at the rate specified in proviso to
Section 34 of the Act for the relevant period. Even in this
regard the judgment of the High Court, therefore, cannot be
sustained.
19. For the reasons aforestated we partially allow the
appeals of the appellants that the claimants/appellants would
be entitled to receive compensation at the rate of ` 2,800/- per
cent for the acquired land and the consequential benefits ofSection 23(1)A. The claimants would also be entitled to get
interest on solatium according to proviso to Section 34B of the
Act. As already noted, the claimants have not pressed for any
enhancement for the superstructures namely well, trees, etc.
which, in any case, is hereby rejected.
20. In the facts and circumstances of the cases parties are
left to bear their own costs.
..
…..................................J.
[Dr. Mukundakam Sharma]
.…
…................................J.
New Delhi, [Swatanter Kumar]
October 8, 2010.