REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 569 OF 2018
[ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO. 5611 OF 2017]
SEEMA SINGH .....APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION & .....RESPONDENT(S)
ANR.
W I T H
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 570 OF 2018
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO. 3511 OF 2018
ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 26339 OF 2017)
J U D G M E N T
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Delay condoned in Diary No. 26339 of 2017.
2) Leave granted.
3) In the Criminal Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.)
No. 5611 of 2017, the appellant, on whose complaint case is
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 1 of 23registered against respondent No.2 herein under Sections 498-A,
302 and 120-B IPC, has challenged order dated March 09, 2017
passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, whereby
respondent No. 2 has been enlarged on bail subject to the
following conditions:
“(a) The applicant shall not tamper with the prosecution
evidence.
(b) The applicant shall not pressurize the prosecution
witnesses.
(c) The applicant shall appear on the date fixed by the trial
court.
(d) The applicant shall not commit an offence similar to
the offence of which he is accused, or suspected of the
commission, of which he is suspected.
(e) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted
with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from
disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or
tamper with the evidence.
In case of default of any of the conditions
enumerated above, it would be open to the opposite party
to approach the Court concerned for cancellation of bail.
However, it is directed that the aforesaid case
pending before the court below be decided expeditiously, if
possible within a period of one year strictly, on day to day
basis in accordance with Section 309 Cr.P.C. and also in
view of principle as has been laid down in the recent
judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Vinod
Kumar v. State of Punjab; 2015 (3) SCC 220 if there is no
legal impediment.
It is made clear that in case, the witnesses are not
appearing before the court concerned, liberty is being
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 2 of 23given to the concerned court to take necessary coercive
measures in accordance with law for ensuring the
presence of the witnesses.
Apart from the aforesaid conditions, it is further
provided that the applicant shall surrender his passport
within a period of two weeks’ from the date of his release
before the concerned court and shall co-operate with the
investigation. It is further provided that the applicant shall
present himself before the court concerned on each and
every date and will not seek any adjournment whatsoever
and in case any adjournment is sought on any exceptional
circumstances, the court concerned shall specify the
reasons in the order itself while granting such
adjournment. It is also provided that in case, there is any
change of address, the concerned S.S.P. and the Court
shall be immediately informed.
Liberty is also being given to the learned counsel for
the complainant to file a bail cancellation application
before the court concerned itself, in case, there is any
violation on the part of the applicant of the aforesaid
conditions.”
4) Other appeal is preferred by the Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBI) for the same relief as CBI also feels aggrieved by the same
very order granting bail to respondent No. 2, who is facing trial in
the aforesaid case.
5) The gravamen of the charge against respondent No. 2 is that he
has murdered his wife Smt. Sara Singh. The allegations in the
chargesheet are that respondent No. 2 got married to the
deceased at Arya Samaj Mandir, Lucknow on July 27, 2013
where after the deceased went to live at her mother’s place due
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 3 of 23to the social non-acceptance of their marriage by the family
members of respondent No. 2. She used to live at her mother’s
place when suddenly respondent No. 2 started behaving cordially
with his wife and planned a trip in July, 2015 along with her to
New Delhi/Leh. During the course of their journey, the Maruti
Swift Car allegedly met with an accident on July 09, 2015 near
Sirsaganj, District Firozabad. It was not an accident but a pre-
planned plot to get rid of the deceased and subsequently a FIR
dated July 18, 2015 was registered by the appellant herein who is
the mother of the deceased. Consequently the Case Crime No.
387 of 2015 under Sections 498-A, 302 and 120-B IPC, Police
Station Sirsaganj, District Firozabad was registered. The State
Government transferred the case to the CBI vide notification
issued on July 24, 2015 and another notification was issued by
the Department of Personnel & Training, Government of India,
New Delhi on October 14, 2015. In pursuance of the above
notifications, the CBI registered a case bearing No. RC No.
6(S)/2015/ SCU.V/SC.II/CBI dated October 19, 2015 and
accordingly the CBI commenced the investigation of the aforesaid
case on October 19, 2015. Subsequently, on the basis of
evidence collected by the CBI, respondent No. 2 was arrested on
November 25, 2016. Thereafter, respondent No. 2 filed his bail
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 4 of 23application before the Special Judicial Magistrate, CBI,
Ghaziabad which was rejected vide order dated December 15,
2016. Another bail application was rejected vide order dated
January 13, 2017. Eventually the bail application was filed before
the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad which has been allowed
vide impugned order dated March 09, 2017 and bail is granted.
6) It becomes clear from the above that respondent No. 2 maintains
that incident in question was merely an accident in which his wife
died. On the other hand, the prosecution alleges that in reality,
respondent No. 2 murdered his wife and thereafter stage
managed the said accident in order to project that Sara Singh
died in the said accident.
7) According to respondent No.2, when their car met with an
accident on July 09, 2015 which was being driven by him and his
wife Sara Singh was also sitting therein, she got badly injured and
while she was taken to the hospital, she expired and was
declared brought dead by the District Hospital, Ferozabad.
Postmortem of the body was conducted and as per the report, the
cause of death was due to the injuries received in the said
accident. Sara Singh was cremated thereafter. However, on
July 18, 2015, the FIR was lodged doubting the postmortem
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 5 of 23report and alleging that Sara Singh was murdered. After the
investigation of the case was transferred to the CBI, CBI has
obtained the report from Central Road Research Institute (CRRI),
report of the Medical Board constituted by the All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, report from Central
Forensic Science Laboratory (CFSL), New Delhi as well as from
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT). On the basis of these reports
and further investigation, chargesheet was prepared and
submitted to the CBI court, Ferozabad.
8) Respondent No. 2 was arrested on November 25, 2016 and was
granted bail on March 09, 2017. He, thus, remained in custody
for three and half months.
9) The case set up by respondent No. 2 in support of his plea for bail
in the High Court was that the accused and his wife had planned
a trip to Leh and when they reached Ferozabad, the accused
found that a small school girl was coming on her bicycle from the
other side. In order to save her, the accused had to apply sudden
brakes on his vehicle which was being driven at a high speed and
diverted the stearing as a result of which the car went out of
control and fell in a ditch alongside road. The result was that the
car skidded and over-turned. It was also pleaded that there were
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 6 of 23no eye-witnesses of the incident and no evidence whatsoever
which could show the participation of respondent No. 2 as per the
role assiged by the CBI. The prosecution, while opposing the
bail, had drawn the attention to the reports of CRRI, AIIMS, CFSL
and IIT. On the basis of these reports, it was contended that
there was clear evidence to show that it was not an accident as
narrated by respondent No. 2 and, therefore, it was the result of a
pre-planned murder. Referring to the report of the AIIMS, it was
argued that Sara Singh was initially strangulated and thereafter
crime scene was created in which the accident became the
culminating point. It was also emphasised that respondent No. 2
had a criminal history of three cases.
10) The order of the High Court shows that in coming to the
conclusion that respondent No. 2 was entitled to bail, pending
trial, following factors weighed with it:
(a) Videography of the postmortem was not done.
(b) After the alleged accident, respondent No. 2 had informed
about the same to the family members of the deceased. On
receiving this information, mother of the deceased had arrived
and postmortem was done in her presence and other family
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 7 of 23members. At that time, certain doctors who were close and well-
known to the family of the deceased were also present at the spot
and they had taken certain photographs of the body before the
postmortem was done. At that time, none of these persons raised
any objection with regard to the videography of the postmortem
not being done. They did not demand second postmortem either
in case they had suspicion.
(c) Insofar as the report of AIIMS is concerned, it is solely
based on photographs which were provided to the panel of
doctors and, thus, doctors never conducted any postmortem on
the body of the deceased.
(d) There is no eye-witness account which may show that the
girl was either tortured or threatened on the way or she was
injured, though vague allegations have been made in this behalf
but without any supporting documents.
(e) After investigation, the chargesheet had been filed by the
CBI. The main crux of the chargesheet is only the documentary
evidence and not any eye-witness account. Documentary
evidence is already available with the CBI. Therefore, there is no
possible apprehension of respondent No. 2 in either hampering
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 8 of 23with the investigation or tampering with the evidence or
threatening anybody in case he is released on bail.
(f) There is no likelihood of accused absconding as well.
11) Mr. Prashant Bhushan, who argued on behalf of the complainant,
and Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General,
who argued for CBI, read out extensively from the aforesaid
reports of the expert bodies, namely, CRRI, AIIMS, CFSL and IIT.
It was submitted by them that the report of the CRRI clearly
depicted that there was no likelihood of any such accident as
narrated by respondent No. 2 having regard to the condition of
the car and the place of accident. It was, thus, a make-belief
story putforth by the accused. From the report submitted by the
doctors from the AIIMS, it was pointed out that cause of death
was fatal pressure over neck by ligature and this would indicate
Sara Singh had not died in the accident but was strangulated to
death by the accused. Reports of CFSL and IIT, likewise, were
read out to support the aforesaid case put up by the prosecution,
namely, alleged accident as projected by respondent No. 2 could
not have happened and, therefore, he was making a false case
that Sara Singh had died in an accident. It was also argued that
the defence set up by respondent No. 2 was false inasmuch as
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 9 of 23both were sitting in the said car when the alleged incident took
place and how it was possible that insofar as one passenger
(namely, Sara Singh) is concerned, she died and the other one
(namely, respondent No. 2) did not suffer even minor injuries. It
was, thus, pleaded that when there was nothing to show that
chargesheet was false and it has also come on record that
accused is a history-sheeter and belongs to influential political
family, bail should not have been granted by the High Court. Mr.
Bhushan also referred to the following judgments of this Court in
support of his contention that it was a fit case for setting aside the
order of the High Court granting bail:
(i) Neeru Yadav v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.1
“15. This being the position of law, it is clear as cloudless
sky that the High Court has totally ignored the criminal
antecedents of the accused. What has weighed with the
High Court is the doctrine of parity. A history-sheeter
involved in the nature of crimes which we have reproduced
hereinabove, are not minor offences so that he is not to be
retained in custody, but the crimes are of heinous nature
and such crimes, by no stretch of imagination, can be
regarded as jejune. Such cases do create a thunder and
lightning having the effect potentiality of torrential rain in an
analytical mind. The law expects the judiciary to be alert
while admitting these kind of accused persons to be at
large and, therefore, the emphasis is on exercise of
discretion judiciously and not in a whimsical manner.
xxx xxx xxx
1 (2016) 15 SCC 422
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 10 of 2318. Before parting with the case, we may repeat with profit
that it is not an appeal for cancellation of bail as the
cancellation is not sought because of supervening
circumstances. The annulment of the order passed by the
High Court is sought as many relevant factors have not
been taken into consideration which includes the criminal
antecedents of the accused and that makes the order a
deviant one. Therefore, the inevitable result is the
lancination of the impugned order [Budhpal v. State of
U.P., 2014 SCC OnLine All 14815].”
(ii) Prasanta Kumar Sarkar v. Ashis Chatterjee & Anr.2
“9. We are of the opinion that the impugned order is
clearly unsustainable. It is trite that this Court does not,
normally, interfere with an order passed by the High Court
granting or rejecting bail to the accused. However, it is
equally incumbent upon the High Court to exercise its
discretion judiciously, cautiously and strictly in compliance
with the basic principles laid down in a plethora of
decisions of this Court on the point. It is well settled that,
among other circumstances, the factors to be borne in
mind while considering an application for bail are:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable
ground to believe that the accused had committed
the offence;
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of conviction;
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if
released on bail;
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and standing
of the accused;
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being
influenced; and
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by grant
of bail.
2 (2010) 14 SCC 496
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 11 of 23[See State of U.P. v. Amarmani Tripathi (SCC p.31, para
18), Prahlad Singh Bhati v. NCT of Delhi, and Ram Govind
Upadhyay v. Sudarshal Singh.]
10. It is manifest that if the High Court does not advert to
these relevant considerations and mechanically grants
bail, the said order would suffer from the vice of non-
application of mind, rendering it to be illegal. In Masroor, a
Division Bench of this Court, of which one of us (D.K. Jain,
J.) was a member, observed as follows: (SCC p. 290, para
13)
“13...Though at the stage of granting bail an elaborate
examination of evidence and detailed reasons touching
the merit of the case, which may prejudice the accused,
should be avoided, but there is a need to indicate in such
order reasons for prima facie concluding why bail was
being granted particularly where the accused is charged
of having committed a serious office.”
(See also State of Maharashtra v. Ritesh, Panchanan
Mishra v. Digambar Mishra, Vijay Kumar v. Narendra and
Anwari Begum v. Sher Mohammad.)
11. We are constrained to observe that in the instant
case, while dealing with the application of the accused for
grant of bail, the High Court completely lost sight of the
basic principles enumerated above. The accused, in the
present case, is alleged to have committed a heinous
crime of killing an old helpless lady by strangulation. He
was seen coming out of the victim’s house by a neighbour
around the time of the alleged occurrence, giving rise to a
reasonable belief that he had committed the murder. We
feel that under the given circumstances, it was not the
stage at which bail under Section 439 of the Code should
have been granted to the accused, more so, when even
charges have not yet been framed.”
12) Mr. Manan Kumar Mishra, learned senior counsel appearing for
the accused, strongly refuted the aforesaid submissions. He
referred to the same very reports of the expert bodies and
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 12 of 23submitted that these very reports when read minutely, would
indicate that none of these reports have given any final and
conclusive opinion. He laid much stress on the fact that these
reports were based on postmortem of the ‘photographs’ of
deceased and not of the ‘body of the deceased’ and, therefore,
could not be given much credence in any case. He also pointed
out that insofar as opinion of doctors of AIIMS is concerned, while
assigning the cause of death, the Medical Board itself had
cautioned that same should be corroborated with the
circumstantial evidence of the investigation in this case. On that
basis, he reiterated his submissions which were accepted by the
High Court, as mentioned above, and argued that the High Court
had rightly exercised its discretion in granting bail to respondent
No. 2. He further argued that once such a discretion is exercised,
unless it is shown that the same is perverse, the Court should not
interfere with the same. In support, he relied upon the judgments
of this Court in:
(i) Tomaso Bruno and Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh3:
“36. In the second post-mortem report, Ext. Ka-11,
substantially there were no changes except signs of
decomposition. The second post-mortem report reiterates
that cause of death is “asphyxia as a result of
strangulation”. According to the medical opinion, a hard
3 (2015) 7 SCC 178
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 13 of 23blunt substance appears to have been used to cause
strangulation leading to the death on account of asphyxia.
However, no such hard or blunt substance was found or
seized from the room. Doctors have not found any physical
signs of internal injuries viz. any extravasation of blood in
the tissue or any laceration in the underlying muscles.
37. Considering the post-mortem reports, Exts. Ka-10 and
Ka-11 and the evidence of PWs 10 and 11, in our view,
reasonable doubts arise as to the cause of death due to
asphyxia as a result of strangulation. Let us consider the
injuries found on the body of deceased Francesco Montis
vis-à-vis symptoms of strangulation. As per Modi's Medical
Jurisprudence And Toxicology, 24th Edn. 2011, p. 453 the
symptoms of strangulation are stated as under:
“(b)Appearances due to Asphyxia.—The face is
puffy and cyanosed, and marked with petechiae. The
eyes are prominent and open. In some cases, they
may be closed. The conjunctivae are congested and
the pupils are dilated. Petechiae are seen in the
eyelids and the conjunctivae. The lips are blue.
Bloody foam escapes from the mouth and nostrils,
and sometimes, pure blood issues from the mouth,
nose and ears, especially if great violence has been
used. The tongue is often swollen, bruised, protruding
and dark in colour, showing patches of extravasation
and occasionally bitten by the teeth. There may be
evidence of bruising at the back of the neck. The
hands are usually clenched. The genital organs may
be congested and there may be discharge of urine,
faeces and seminal fluid.
(ii) Internal Appearance.—The neck and its
structures should be examined after removing the
brain and the chest organs, thus allowing blood to
drain from the neck to the blood vessels. There is
extravasation of blood into the sub-cutaneous tissues
under the ligature mark or finger marks, as well as in
the adjacent muscles of the neck, which are usually
lacerated. Sometimes, there is laceration of the
sheath of the carotid arteries, as also their internal
coats with effusion of blood into their walls. The
cornua of the hyoid bone may be fractured also the
superior cornua of thyroid cartilage but fracture of the
cervical vertebrae is extremely rare. These should be
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 14 of 23carefully dissected in situ as they are difficult to
distinguish from dissection artefacts in the neck.”
(emphasis in original)
xxx xxx xxx
40. The courts, normally would look at expert evidence
with a greater sense of acceptability, but it is equally true
that the courts are not absolutely guided by the report of
the experts, especially if such reports are perfunctory and
unsustainable. We agree that the purpose of an expert
opinion is primarily to assist the court in arriving at a final
conclusion but such report is not a conclusive one. This
Court is expected to analyse the report, read it in
conjunction with the other evidence on record and then
form its final opinion as to whether such report is worthy of
reliance or not. As discussed earlier, serious doubts arise
about the cause of death stated in the post-mortem
reports.”
(ii) Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetra v. State of Maharashtra
& Ors.4:
“87. The complaint filed against the accused needs to be
thoroughly examined including the aspect whether the
complainant has filed a false or frivolous complaint on
earlier occasion. The court should also examine the fact
whether there is any family dispute between the accused
and the complainant and the complainant must be clearly
told that if the complaint is found to be false or frivolous,
then strict action will be taken against him in accordance
with law. If the connivance between the complainant and
the investigating officer is established then action be taken
against the investigating officer in accordance with law.
88. The gravity of charge and the exact role of the accused
must be properly comprehended. Before arrest, the
arresting officer must record the valid reasons which have
led to the arrest of the accused in the case diary. In
exceptional cases the reasons could be recorded
immediately after the arrest, so that while dealing with the
4 (2011) 1 SCC 694
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 15 of 23bail application, the remarks and observations of the
arresting officer can also be properly evaluated by the
court.
89. It is imperative for the courts to carefully and with
meticulous precision evaluate the facts of the case. The
discretion must be exercised on the basis of the available
material and the facts of the particular case. In cases
where the court is of the considered view that the accused
has joined investigation and he is fully cooperating with the
investigating agency and is not likely to abscond, in that
event, custodial interrogation should be avoided.
xxx xxx xxx
115. In Joginder Kumar case [(1994) 4 SCC 260 : 1994
SCC (Cri) 1172] a three-Judge Bench of this Court has
referred to the 3rd Report of the National Police
Commission, in which it is mentioned that the quality of
arrests by the police in India mentioned the power of arrest
as one of the chief sources of corruption in the police. The
Report suggested that, by and large, nearly 60% of the
arrests were either unnecessary or unjustified and that
such unjustified police action accounted for 43.2% of the
expenditure of the jails.
116. Personal liberty is a very precious fundamental right
and it should be curtailed only when it becomes imperative
according to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the
case.
117. In case, the State considers the following suggestions
in proper perspective then perhaps it may not be
necessary to curtail the personal liberty of the accused in a
routine manner. These suggestions are only illustrative
and not exhaustive:
(1) Direct the accused to join the investigation and only
when the accused does not cooperate with the
investigating agency, then only the accused be arrested.
(2) Seize either the passport or such other related
documents, such as, the title deeds of properties or the
fixed deposit receipts/share certificates of the accused.
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 16 of 23(3) Direct the accused to execute bonds.
(4) The accused may be directed to furnish sureties of a
number of persons which according to the prosecution are
necessary in view of the facts of the particular case.
(5) The accused be directed to furnish undertaking that he
would not visit the place where the witnesses reside so
that the possibility of tampering of evidence or otherwise
influencing the course of justice can be avoided.
(6) Bank accounts be frozen for small duration during the
investigation.
118. In case the arrest is imperative, according to the facts
of the case, in that event, the arresting officer must clearly
record the reasons for the arrest of the accused before the
arrest in the case diary, but in exceptional cases where it
becomes imperative to arrest the accused immediately, the
reasons be recorded in the case diary immediately after
the arrest is made without loss of any time so that the
court has an opportunity to properly consider the case for
grant or refusal of bail in the light of reasons recorded by
the arresting officer.
119. Exercise of jurisdiction under Section 438 CrPC is an
extremely important judicial function of a Judge and must
be entrusted to judicial officers with some experience and
good track record. Both the individual and society have
vital interest in orders passed by the courts in anticipatory
bail applications.
120. It is imperative for the High Courts through its judicial
academies to periodically organise workshops,
symposiums, seminars and lectures by the experts to
sensitise judicial officers, police officers and investigating
officers so that they can properly comprehend the
importance of personal liberty vis-à-vis social interests.
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 17 of 23They must learn to maintain fine balance between the
personal liberty and the social interests.
121. The performance of the judicial officers must be
periodically evaluated on the basis of the cases decided by
them. In case, they have not been able to maintain
balance between personal liberty and societal interests,
the lacunae must be pointed out to them and they may be
asked to take corrective measures in future. Ultimately, the
entire discretion of grant or refusal of bail has to be left to
the judicial officers and all concerned must ensure that
grant or refusal of bail is considered basically on the facts
and circumstances of each case.
122. In our considered view, the Constitution Bench in
Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465] has
comprehensively dealt with almost all aspects of the
concept of anticipatory bail under Section 438 CrPC. A
number of judgments have been referred to by the learned
counsel for the parties consisting of Benches of smaller
strength where the Courts have observed that the
anticipatory bail should be of limited duration only and
ordinarily on expiry of that duration or standard duration,
the court granting the anticipatory bail should leave it to
the regular court to deal with the matter. This view is
clearly contrary to the view taken by the Constitution
Bench in Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri)
465] . In the preceding para, it is clearly spelt out that no
limitation has been envisaged by the legislature under
Section 438 CrPC. The Constitution Bench has aptly
observed that “we see no valid reason for rewriting Section
438 with a view, not to expanding the scope and ambit of
the discretion conferred on the High Court or the Court of
Session but, for the purpose of limiting it”.
123. In view of the clear declaration of law laid down by
the Constitution Bench in Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 :
1980 SCC (Cri) 465] , it would not be proper to limit the life
of anticipatory bail. When the Court observed that the
anticipatory bail is for limited duration and thereafter the
accused should apply to the regular court for bail, that
means the life of Section 438 CrPC would come to an end
after that limited duration. This limitation has not been
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 18 of 23envisaged by the legislature. The Constitution Bench in
Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465]
clearly observed that it is not necessary to rewrite Section
438 CrPC. Therefore, in view of the clear declaration of the
law by the Constitution Bench, the life of the order under
Section 438 CrPC granting bail cannot be curtailed.
124. The ratio of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in
Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465]
perhaps was not brought to the notice of Their Lordships
who had decided the cases of Salauddin Abdulsamad
Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra [(1996) 1 SCC 667 : 1996
SCC (Cri) 198] , K.L. Verma v. State [(1998) 9 SCC 348 :
1998 SCC (Cri) 1031] , Adri Dharan Das v. State of W.B.
[(2005) 4 SCC 303 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 933] and Sunita Devi
v. State of Bihar [(2005) 1 SCC 608 : 2005 SCC (Cri)
435] .”
13) We have deliberated on the respective arguments in conjunction
with the record of the case. Since we are concerned with the
order of the High Court whereby respondent No. 2 has been
granted bail, having regard to the limited scope of interference
with such an order and keeping in mind the parameters on which
such an order can be interdicted, we are of the view that the
reasons given by the High Court to grant bail to respondent No. 2,
cannot be termed as perverse. It can be discerned from the
reading of the impugned order, from which we have culled out
circumstances, that the High Court kept in mind the relevant
factors while considering the bail application. No doubt, the
offence with which respondent No. 2 is charged is a serious one.
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 19 of 23That by itself cannot be the ground to outrightly deny the benefit
of bail if there are other overwhelming circumstances justifying
grant of bail. The High Court has discussed those factors which
are reproduced above in para 9. No doubt, the counsel for the
appellants have extensively referred to the reports of CRRI,
AIIMS, CFSL and IIT. Their evidentiary value is yet to be tested,
more so, when these reports are given on the basis of studies
undertaken much after the incident. Report of AIIMS is based on
the photographs and not on the basis of postmortem of the body
of the deceased. Moreover, the learned counsel for respondent
No. 2 has made a submission that AIIMS has not given any
conclusive opinion. According to him, same is the position qua
other reports as well. We are not supposed to examine these
reports in depth at this stage as that exercise has to be done by
the trial court when these reports are proved by the makers of the
report and they are cross-examined thereupon. Moreover, in a
criminal case where respondent No. 2 is charged of committing
murder, the burden is upon the prosecution to establish, beyond
reasonable doubts, that the death of Sara Singh was the result of
a murder and that it is respondent No. 2 who committed the said
murder. His defence about alleged accident is only one of the
factors that would be looked into as to whether such a story
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 20 of 23putforth by him is correct or not and the effect thereof. We have
to keep in mind that, at this juncture, the limited question is as to
whether the High Court is rightly used its discretion to grant the
bail.
14) We are of the opinon that the High Court has taken into
consideration relevant factors while granting the bail to
respondent No.2. The impugned order is also a speaking order
with reasons that need to be given in brief while deciding as to
whether the undertrial is entitled to bail or not. Therefore, the
judgment cited by the learned counsel for the complainant would
not apply to the facts of this case. We may refer to a recent
judgment dated February 06, 2018 in the case of Dataram Singh
v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.5 wherein this Court (speaking
through Madan B. Lokur, J.) made the following pertinent
observations:
“2. A fundamental postulate of criminal jurisprudence is
the presumption of innocence, meaning thereby that a
person is believed to be innocent until found guilty.
However, there are instances in our criminal law where a
reverse onus has been placed on an accused with regard
to some specific offences but that is another matter and
does not detract from the fundamental postulate in respect
of other offences. Yet another important facet of our
criminal jurisprudence is that the grant of bail is the
general rule and putting a person in jail or in a prison or in
a correction home (whichever expression one may wish to
5 (2018) 3 SCC 22
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 21 of 23use) is an exception. Unfortunately, some of these basic
principles appear to have been lost sight of with the result
that more and more persons are being incarcerated and
for longer periods. This does not do any good to our
criminal jurisprudence or to our society.
3. There is no doubt that the grant or denial of bail is
entirely the discretion of the judge considering a case but
even so, the exercise of judicial discretion has been
circumscribed by a large number of decisions rendered by
this Court and by every High Court in the country. Yet,
occasionally there is a necessity to introspect whether
denying bail to an accused person is the right thing to do
on the facts and in the circumstances of a case.
xxx xxx xxx
7. However, we should not be understood to mean that
bail should be granted in every case. The grant or refusal
of bail is entirely within the discretion of the judge hearing
the matter and though that discretion is unfettered, it must
be exercised judiciously and in a humane manner and
compassionately. Also, conditions for the grant of bail
ought not to be so strict as to be incapable of compliance,
thereby making the grant of bail illusory.”
15) It has not been disputed that after the incident in which Sara
Singh died, mother of the deceased, other family members as
well as some doctors who were close to the family had arrived.
Postmortem was conducted in their presence. At that stage,
nobody nurtured any suspicion. FIR was lodged nine days after
the incident. The material collected by the CBI during
investigation is documentary in nature which are given on the
basis of photographs produced before them and had to be tested
during trial. Insofar as allegations of threat are concerned, it was
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 22 of 23argued by Mr. Manan that the police examined the same and
found to be false. In any case, the High Court has given liberty to
the prosecution to apply for cancellation of bail in case any such
threat is extended or there is any violation on the part of
respondent No. 2 to any of the conditions of the bail. The High
Court has imposed strict conditions of bail keeping in view the
interest of the prosecution as well.
16) We, therefore, do not find any merit in these appeals which are
accordingly dismissed.
.............................................J.
(A.K. SIKRI)
.............................................J.
(ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 18, 2018.
Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr. Page 23 of 23