http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 7
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 564 of 2002
PETITIONER:
Rugmini Ammal (dead) by Lrs.
RESPONDENT:
V. Narayana Reddiar & Ors.
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 13/12/2007
BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT & P. SATHASIVAM
JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
1. Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a Division
Bench of the Kerala High Court by which the judgment of the
learned Single judge was set aside and the writ appeal was
allowed.
2. Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:
Respondent No.4 in CMP No.35930 of 1998 in O.P.
No.12701 of 1998 was the 4th respondent in writ petition also.
According to the respondent No.1 he was the tenant of a
building called \021Jaya building\022 Main Road, Kollam. The tenancy
was given by one Durairaja Reddiar by executing an
agreement of lease dated 6.1.1994. This lease deed enabled
him to make alterations in the building. Accordingly he
effected some alterations in the building. When it was found
that the alterations were effected he received from the Kollam
Municipality an order directing him to demolish the structure
which according to the Municipality was unauthorized.
Against the order of the Municipality respondent No.1
approached the Government. The Government issued an order
dated 22.6.1998 which was annexed as Ext.P5 to the writ
petition, directing the respondent No.1 to submit an
application to the local authority seeking regularization of the
additional structure made by him. Rugmini Ammal, the first
respondent in the Writ Appeal filed a writ petition. The
contention raised by her was that there was no lease
agreement and that the construction was unauthorized. It was
stated that the construction cannot be legalized on other
grounds.
3. Respondent No.1 filed a counter-affidavit. Along with
counter-affidavit photocopy of the agreement of lease dated
6.1.1994 was annexed. Thereafter Rugmini Ammal filed CMP
No.35930 of 1998. The contentions taken in the CMP was that
the purported agreement of lease is a forged document. It was
further stated that she sought the opinion of Professor B.B.
Kashyap, a renowned handwriting and finger print expert.
The signatures in the purported lease agreement, Exh. R4(a)
was compared with the admitted signatures of Durairaj
Reddiar in Ext. P7. The expert gave his opinion, the copy ofhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 7
which was produced as Exh.P18. According to it the
signatures in Exh.R4(a) did not tally with the admitted
signatures. Hence the handwriting expert was of the opinion
that the five disputed signatures were not written by the writer
of the admitted signatures.
4. A counter-affidavit was filed in CMP No.35930 of 1998.
In the counter-affidavit, it was stated that Exh. R4(a) was
produced before the Government and Exh. P5 order itself goes
to show that this was produced before the Government. The
fabrication of Exh.R4(a) was denied. A reply affidavit was filed
in which Rugmini Ammal denied the execution of certain
documents signed by Reddiar and produced by the appellant
in the writ appeal. The prayer in CMP No.35930 of 1998 was
to conduct enquiry into the production of Exh.R4(a) forged
document and made a complaint thereof and forward it to the
Magistrate of the First Class having jurisdiction.
5. Learned Single Judge relied on the opinion given by the
handwriting expert and prima facie came to the conclusion
that Exts.R4(a), R4(e), R4(i) and R4(j) were fabricated and
hence there is a reasonable likelihood to establish the offences
punishable under Sections 463, 471, 475 and 476 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short the \021IPC\022). The learned Single
Judge directed the Registrar of the Court to make a complaint
for the purpose in writing and send it to the Magistrate of the
First Class having jurisdiction. Against that order the writ
appeal was filed.
6. Stand of the appellant before the High Court was that
proceedings under Section 340 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (in short the \021Cr.P.C.\022) cannot be initiated
because there was no allegation that the fabrication was made
after the document was produced. Certain other stands were
also taken with which we are not very much concerned.
7. Stand of the respondents in the writ appeal was that the
writ appeal was not maintainable and Section 341 of Cr.P.C.
does not provide for an order passed by the High Court. It was
submitted that Section 340 Cr.P.C. has been rightly initiated.
The High Court was of the view that though Section 341
Cr.P.C. does not provide for an appeal from an order passed
under Section 340 Cr.P.C. it does not mean that there was no
other provision by which appeal cannot be filed. In fact it was
held that Section 5 of the Kerala High Court Act provides for
such an appeal. Reference in this context was made to a Five
Judge Bench decision of the High Court in K.S. Dass v. State
of Kerala [1992 (2) KLT 358]. Reference was also made to some
other full Bench judgments.
8. Coming to the question about the applicability of Section
340 to the facts of the case it was held that stage for initiation
of the proceeding, if any, under Section 340 Cr.P.C. had not
come. Reference was made to a decision of this Court in
Schida Nand Singh and Anr. v. State of Bihar and Anr. [AIR
1998 SC 1121]. Therefore, it was held that initiation of the
proceeding under Section 340 Cr.P.C. was without
jurisdiction. The writ appeal was accordingly allowed.
9. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that there is
a conflict in view between the decision in Sachida Nand\022s case
(supra) and Surjit Singh and Ors. v. Balbir Singh (1996 (3)
SCC 533).
10. Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand
supported the order of the High Court.http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 7
11. At this juncture it is to be noted that in view of the
conflict of language between two decisions of this Court each
rendered by a Bench of three learned Judges in Sachida
Nand\022s case (supra) and Surjit Singh\022s case (supra) regarding
interpretation of Section 195(1)(b)(ii) Cr.P.C. the matter was
placed before a five-judge Bench in Iqbal Singh Marwah v.
Meenakshi Marwah [2005 4) SCC 370]. After referring to the
provisions contained in Sections 190, 195(1)(b)(ii) and 340
Cr.P.C. it was held that the decision in Sachida Nand\022s case
(supra) correctly decided and the view taken is the correct
view. It was, inter alia, observed as follows:
\02319. As mentioned earlier, the words \023by a
party to any proceeding in any court\024
occurring in Section 195(1)( c ) of the old Code
have been omitted in Section 195(1)( b )( ii )
CrPC. Why these words were deleted in the
corresponding provision of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 will be apparent
from the 41st Report of the Law Commission
which said as under in para 15.39:
\02315.39. The purpose of the section is to
bar private prosecutions where the
course of justice is sought to be perverted
leaving to the court itself to uphold its
dignity and prestige. On principle there is
no reason why the safeguard in clause (c)
should not apply to offences committed
by witnesses also. Witnesses need as
much protection against vexatious
prosecutions as parties and the court
should have as much control over the
acts of witnesses that enter as a
component of a judicial proceeding, as
over the acts of parties. If, therefore, the
provisions of clause (c) are extended to
witnesses, the extension would be in
conformity with the broad principle which
forms the basis of Section 195.\024
20. Since the object of deletion of the words
\023by a party to any proceeding in any court\024
occurring in Section 195(1)(c) of the old Code is
to afford protection to witnesses also, the
interpretation placed on the said provision in
the earlier decisions would still hold good.
21. Section 190 CrPC provides that a
Magistrate may take cognizance of any offence
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which
constitute such offence, (b) upon a police
report of such facts, and (c) upon information
received from any person other than a police
officer, or upon his own knowledge, that such
offence has been committed. Section 195 CrPC
is a sort of exception to this general provision
and creates an embargo upon the power of the
court to take cognizance of certain types of
offences enumerated therein. The procedure
for filing a complaint by the court as
contemplated by Section 195(1) CrPC is given
in Section 340 CrPC and sub-sections (1) and
(2) thereof are being reproduced below:
\023340. Procedure in cases mentioned in
Section 195 .\027(1) When, upon anhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 4 of 7
application made to it in this behalf or
otherwise, any court is of opinion that it
is expedient in the interests of justice
that an inquiry should be made into any
offence referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of Section 195, which appears
to have been committed in or in relation
to a proceeding in that court or, as the
case may be, in respect of a document
produced or given in evidence in a
proceeding in that court, such court may,
after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as
it thinks necessary,\027
(a) record a finding to that effect;
(b) make a complaint thereof in
writing;
(c) send it to a Magistrate of the
First Class having jurisdiction;
(d) take sufficient security for the
appearance of the accused before
such Magistrate, or if the alleged
offence is non-bailable and the court
thinks it necessary so to do, send
the accused in custody to such
Magistrate; and
(e) bind over any person to appear
and give evidence before such
Magistrate.
(2) The power conferred on a court by sub-
section (1) in respect of an offence may, in
any case where that court has neither
made a complaint under sub-section (1) in
respect of that offence nor rejected an
application for the making of such
complaint, be exercised by the court to
which such former court is subordinate
within the meaning of sub-section (4) of
Section.
Section 341 CrPC provides for an appeal to
the court to which such former court is
subordinate within the meaning of sub-
section (4) of Section 195, against the
order refusing to make a complaint or
against an order directing filing of a
complaint and in such appeal the superior
court may direct withdrawal of the
complaint or making of the complaint.
Sub-section (2) of Section 343 lays down
that when it is brought to the notice of a
Magistrate to whom a complaint has been
made under Section 340 or 341 that an
appeal is pending against the decision
arrived at in the judicial proceeding out of
which the matter has arisen, he may, if he
thinks fit, at any stage, adjourn the
hearing of the case until such appeal is
decided.
23. In view of the language used in Section
340 CrPC the court is not bound to make a
complaint regarding commission of an
offence referred to in Section 195(1)(b), as
the section is conditioned by the words
\023court is of opinion that it is expedient in
the interests of justice\024. This shows thathttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 5 of 7
such a course will be adopted only if the
interest of justice requires and not in every
case. Before filing of the complaint, the
court may hold a preliminary enquiry and
record a finding to the effect that it is
expedient in the interests of justice that
enquiry should be made into any of the
offences referred to in Section 195(1)(b).
This expediency will normally be judged by
the court by weighing not the magnitude of
injury suffered by the person affected by
such forgery or forged document, but
having regard to the effect or impact, such
commission of offence has upon
administration of justice. It is possible that
such forged document or forgery may
cause a very serious or substantial injury
to a person in the sense that it may
deprive him of a very valuable property or
status or the like, but such document may
be just a piece of evidence produced or
given in evidence in court, where
voluminous evidence may have been
adduced and the effect of such piece of
evidence on the broad concept of
administration of justice may be minimal.
In such circumstances, the court may not
consider it expedient in the interest of
justice to make a complaint. The broad
view of clause (b)(i), as canvassed by
learned counsel for the appellants, would
render the victim of such forgery or forged
document remediless. Any interpretation
which leads to a situation where a victim
of a crime is rendered remediless, has to
be discarded.
There is another consideration which has to be
kept in mind. Sub-section (1) of Section 340
CrPC contemplates holding of a preliminary
enquiry. Normally, a direction for filing of a
complaint is not made during the pendency of
the proceeding before the court and this is
done at the stage when the proceeding is
concluded and the final judgment is rendered.
Section 341 provides for an appeal against an
order directing filing of the complaint. The
hearing and ultimate decision of the appeal is
bound to take time. Section 343(2) confers a
discretion upon a court trying the complaint to
adjourn the hearing of the case if it is brought
to its notice that an appeal is pending against
the decision arrived at in the judicial
proceeding out of which the matter has arisen.
In view of these provisions, the complaint case
may not proceed at all for decades specially in
matters arising out of civil suits where
decisions are challenged in successive
appellate fora which are time-consuming. It is
also to be noticed that there is no provision of
appeal against an order passed under Section
343(2), whereby hearing of the case is
adjourned until the decision of the appeal.
These provisions show that, in reality, the
procedure prescribed for filing a complaint by
the court is such that it may not fructify in thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 6 of 7
actual trial of the offender for an unusually
long period. Delay in prosecution of a guilty
person comes to his advantage as witnesses
become reluctant to give evidence and the
evidence gets lost. This important
consideration dissuades us from accepting the
broad interpretation sought to be placed upon
clause(b)(ii).
25. An enlarged interpretation to Section
195(1)(b)(ii), whereby the bar created by the
said provision would also operate where after
commission of an act of forgery the document
is subsequently produced in court, is capable
of great misuse. As pointed out in Sachida
Nand Singh 2 after preparing a forged
document or committing an act of forgery, a
person may manage to get a proceeding
instituted in any civil, criminal or revenue
court, either by himself or through someone
set up by him and simply file the document in
the said proceeding. He would thus be
protected from prosecution, either at the
instance of a private party or the police until
the court, where the document has been filed,
itself chooses to file a complaint. The litigation
may be a prolonged one due to which the
actual trial of such a person may be delayed
indefinitely. Such an interpretation would be
highly detrimental to the interest of the society
at large.
26. Judicial notice can be taken of the fact
that the courts are normally reluctant to direct
filing of a criminal complaint and such a
course is rarely adopted. It will not be fair and
proper to give an interpretation which leads to
a situation where a person alleged to have
committed an offence of the type enumerated
in clause (b)(ii) is either not placed for trial on
account of non-filing of a complaint or if a
complaint is filed, the same does not come to
its logical end. Judging from such an angle will
be in consonance with the principle that an
unworkable or impracticable result should be
avoided. In Statutory Interpretation by Francis
Bennion (3rd Edn.), para 313, the principle
has been stated in the following manner:
\023The court seeks to avoid a construction
of an enactment that produces an
unworkable or impracticable result,
since this is unlikely to have been
intended by Parliament. Sometimes,
however, there are overriding reasons
for applying such a construction, for
example, where it appears that
Parliament really intended it or the
literal meaning is too strong.\024
In view of the discussion made above, we
are of the opinion that Sachida Nand Singh 2
has been correctly decided and the view taken
therein is the correct view. Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
CrPC would be attracted only when thehttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 7 of 7
offences enumerated in the said provision have
been committed with respect to a document
after it has been produced or given in evidence
in a proceeding in any court i.e. during the
time when the document was in custodia
legis.\024
12. The above position was highlighted in Iqbal Singh
Marwah v. Meenakshi Marwah (supra).
13. The High Court was, therefore, right in placing reliance
on Sachida Nand\022s case (supra).
14. The appeal is, therefore, without merit and is, therefore,
dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.