Non-Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
Civil Appeal Nos.6190-6201 of 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 14206-14217 of 2019)
THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU & ANR.
.... Appellant(s)
Versus
A. KALAIMANI & ORS.
…. Respondent (s)
J U D G M E N T
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
Leave granted.
1. The Teachers Recruitment Board (hereinafter referred
to as the ‘Board’) issued a notification on 28.07.2017
inviting applications for selection to the posts of Lecturers
in Government Polytechnic Colleges in the State of Tamil
Nadu for the year 2017-2018. 1058 vacancies were
notified and 1,70,366 applications were received. A
written examination was conducted on 16.09.2017 in
which 1,33,567 candidates appeared.
2. The written examination was of objective type. A
printed book was given to the candidates in the
1examination hall. The printed book is known as Optical
Mark Recognition (OMR) sheet. After completion of the
written examination, the OMR sheets were scanned in the
office of the Board. The original OMR answer sheets were
kept in the safe custody in the office of the Board.
3. The scanned copies of the OMR sheets were sent to
M/s Datatech Methodex Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘Agency’) for evaluation and for
preparation of the final list of the candidates who qualified
for the certificate verification. The evaluation was done by
the Agency and the list was sent to the Board. The merit
list of the candidates called for certificate verification in
the ratio of 1:2 was released on 07.11.2017. At that stage,
a complaint was made to the Prime Minister’s Office on
17.11.2017 as well as the Board on 21.11.2017 alleging
large scale malpractices in the written examination and
requesting a probe into the complaints of tampering with
the OMR sheets. To verify the genuineness of the
complaint made to the Prime Minister’s Office, Mr. Shaik
Dawood Nazzar representing the Agency was instructed to
send the scanned images of the OMR sheets of the
candidates whose names were mentioned in the
2complaint. Certain discrepancies were found on
comparison of the scanned copies of the OMR sheets with
the original OMR sheets. Immediately thereafter, the
System Manager of the Agency was asked to re-evaluate
the scanned images of the OMR sheets of the candidates
called for certificate verification from the Hard Disk which
was handed over to the Board. After re-evaluation,
discrepancies were found in the entries of 109 candidates
who were called for certificate verification. Further
scrutiny of the answer sheets revealed further
discrepancies in the marks of 225 candidates. On a
deeper scrutiny, the Board found that 196 candidates have
been the beneficiaries of the fraudulent alteration of the
marks.
4. After being satisfied that the marks of 196 candidates
were manipulated, the Board withdrew the result which
was published on 07.11.2017. A decision was taken by the
Board to upload the scanned images of the OMR answer
sheets of all the 1,33,567 candidates along with the final
marks and answer key on the website of the Board. The
candidates were allowed to download copies of their OMR
3answer sheets and lodge objections in the interest of
transparency.
5. A show cause notice was issued to the Agency which
was processing the scanned OMRs to submit their
explanation as to how the manipulation in the answer
sheets of 196 candidates took place. Mr. Shaik Dawood
Nazzar was found responsible for manipulating the OMR
answer sheet images and awarding higher marks to some
candidates after receiving money from one Mr. Ganesan. A
decision was taken to cancel the examination that was
conducted for selection to the posts of Lecturers in
Government Polytechnic Colleges as the Board was of the
view that there were chances of unearthing more
malpractices at a later stage. In view of the serious doubt
about the purity of the process of the examination
conducted on 16.09.2017, the Board cancelled the written
examination and withdrew the merit list dated 07.11.2017
calling candidates for certificate verification.
6. The Board also lodged a complaint with the
Commissioner of Police, Chennai on 21.12.2017 which was
registered as Crime No.468 of 2017 by the Central Crime
Branch for offences under Sections 465, 468, 471, 417,
4201, 120B of IPC and Section 66 read with 43 (1) of the
Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008.
7. A Writ Petition was filed before the Madurai Bench of
the Madras High Court challenging the Notification dated
11.12.2017 by which the written examination was
cancelled and the merit list was withdrawn. A learned
Single Judge of the Madurai Bench of the Madras High
Court allowed the Writ Petition. The learned Single Judge
was of the opinion that it was possible to segregate the
tainted candidates from the non-tainted ones. As the
material gathered during investigation also indicated the
involvement of only 196 candidates, the learned Single
Judge held that their results can be cancelled. A direction
was issued to the Board to proceed with the selections
excluding the 196 candidates from the selection process.
8. Another set of Writ Petitions were filed before the
Principal Bench of the Madras High Court which came up
for consideration after the judgment was delivered by the
learned Single Judge of the Madurai Bench of the High
Court. A learned Single Judge of the Principal Bench
dismissed the Writ Petitions. The Case Diary of the
investigation that was being carried on was summoned by
5the learned Single Judge. After examining the material
that was gathered by the police during the investigation,
the learned Single Judge was convinced that the
irregularities and corrupt activities pervaded through the
entire process of selection. The learned Single Judge was
also of the opinion that the malpractices that were
committed during the conduct of the written examination
were of a higher magnitude and that there was no
possibility of segregating the tainted candidates from the
non-tainted ones. The contention of the Board that the
examination was vitiated by large scale fraud and needed
to be cancelled was accepted by the learned Single Judge.
9. The unsuccessful candidates in the Writ Petitions
decided by the learned Single Judge of the Principal Bench
of the Madras High Court, the State of Tamil Nadu and the
Board aggrieved by the order of the learned Single Judge
of the Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court filed
appeals before the Division Bench. A Division Bench of the
Madras High Court decided the writ appeals and ruled in
favour of Respondents. The Division Bench found fault
with the learned Single Judge in not referring the matter to
a larger Bench in case he was in disagreement with the
6earlier judgment on the same issue by the Madurai Bench
of the Madras High Court. The Division Bench also
examined the merits of the matter and held that the
fabrication of the records pertained only to 196 candidates
and there was no material to suggest any tampering by
the other candidates who took the examination. When
segregation was possible, the Division Bench was of the
opinion that the entire examination cannot be cancelled by
the Board. Relying on judgments of this Court in
Inderpreet Singh Kahlon v. State of Punjab1,
Joginder Pal v. State of Punjab2 and Union of India v.
Rajesh PU, Puthuvalnikathu3, the Division Bench held
that the decision of the Board to cancel the entire selection
process was vitiated. Aggrieved by the said decision of the
Division Bench of the High Court, this appeal is filed.
10. Mr. Balaji Srinivasan, learned Additional Advocate
General for the State of Tamil Nadu submitted that the
decision taken by the Board to cancel the written
examination was on the basis of abundant material that
was available with the Board. He submitted that the
available material suggests large scale malpractices in the
1 (2006) 11 SCC 356
2 (2014) 6 SCC 644
3 (2003) 7 SCC 285
7conduct of the written examination. He placed before us a
note submitted by the Central Crime Bureau which
discloses the involvement of several persons who have
conspired to commit large scale malpractices in the
process of selections to the post of Lecturers in the
Government Polytechnic Colleges. Huge amounts of
money changed hands. The note that was submitted also
suggests that certain persons have been arrested and
have been remanded to judicial custody. Several persons
have also been detained under the Goondas Act and they
are in the Central Prison, Puzhal. There are others who are
absconding and serious efforts are being made to
apprehend them. The investigation is under progress
according to the note that is furnished to us. The learned
Additional Advocate General urged that the decision taken
by the Board does not call for any interference as it was
taken in the interest of high standards and integrity of the
examination.
11. Mr. M. Ajmal Khan and Ms. Nalini Chidambaram,
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Respondent-
Candidates referred to the interim orders passed by the
Division Bench by which the investigation authorities were
8summoned and records pertaining to the investigation
were called for. They relied upon the interim orders to
support the judgment of the Division Bench that there is no
material to suggest the involvement of any other
candidate apart from the 196 candidates who have been
found indulging in malpractices. They justified the
observations of the Division Bench in the impugned
judgment by submitting that segregation of 196
candidates from the others is possible for which reason the
cancellation of the entire selection process is contrary to
the law laid down by this Court. Irreparable injury and
untold misery will be caused to such meritorious
candidates who were successful in the written examination
if they are asked to take the written examination afresh.
12. In Inderpreet Singh Kahlon (supra), allegations
were made against Mr. Ravinderpal Singh Sidhu, Chairman
of the Public Service Commission for having accepted
money and manipulating the results of some candidates in
the selections to various posts by the Public Service
Commission. Results were announced and the selected
candidates were appointed. Pursuant to an inquiry
conducted into the allegations against Mr. Ravinderpal
9Singh Sidhu, appointments of persons who were selected
with his help were terminated. This Court on the facts of
the said case held that merely because allegations are
made against the Chairman of the Public Service
Commission the decision to cancel the entire selection
process without examining as to whether the entire
selection process was vitiated is wrong. This Court further
held that there is a vast difference in the cancellation of
examination prior to the selection and the termination of
services of appointed persons. We are of the considered
opinion that the facts of this case are entirely different and
the judgment in Inderpreet Singh Kahlon (supra) is not
applicable. It is not necessary to refer to the other
judgments which have followed Inderpreet Singh
Kahlon (supra).
13. In the instant case, the Board initially conducted an
inquiry on its own regarding the allegations pertaining to
manipulation of the OMR answer sheets. The Board found
that a few people benefited due to the tampering of the
OMR answer sheets. On a deeper scrutiny sufficient
material was found against 196 persons who were
beneficiaries of the fraud in the alteration of marks. The
10Board was convinced that there were chances of more
people being involved in the manipulation of marks for
which reason a decision was taken to cancel the entire
examination. A bona fide decision taken by the Board to
instill confidence in the public regarding the integrity of the
selection process could not have been interfered with by
the High Court. Sufficiency of the material on the basis of
which a decision is taken by an authority is not within the
purview of the High Court in exercising its power of judicial
review. More material is being unearthed in the
investigation and several people have been arrested. The
investigation is in progress.
14. In Gohil Vishvaraj Hanubhai and Ors. Vs. State
of Gujarat and Ors4., this Court held:
“21. Purity of the examination process –
whether such examination process pertains to
assessment of the academic accomplishment or
suitability of candidates for employment under
the State – is an unquestionable requirement of
the rationality of any examination process.
Rationality is an indispensable aspect of public
administration under our Constitution. The
authority of the State to take appropriate
4 (2017) 3 SCC 621
11measures to maintain the purity of any
examination process is unquestionable. It is too
well settled a principle of law in light of the
various earlier decisions of this Court that where
there are allegations of the occurrence of large-
scale malpractices in the course of the conduct
of any examination process, the State or its
instrumentalities are entitled to cancel the
examination. This Court has on numerous
occasions approved the action of the State or its
instrumentalities to cancel examinations
whenever such action is believed to be
necessary on the basis of some reasonable
material to indicate that the examination
process is vitiated. They are also not obliged to
seek proof of each and every fact which vitiated
the examination process.”
It was further held in the said judgment as follows:
“30. Identifying all the candidates who are
guilty of malpractice either by criminal
prosecution or even by an administrative
enquiry is certainly a time-consuming process.
If it were to be the requirement of law that such
identification of the wrongdoers is a must and
only the identified wrongdoers be eliminated
from the selection process, and until such
identification is completed the process cannot
be carried on, it would not only result in a great
inconvenience to the administration, but also
12result in a loss of time even to the innocent
candidates. On the other hand, by virtue of the
impugned action, the innocent candidates (for
the matter all the candidates including the
wrongdoers) still get an opportunity of
participating in the fresh examination process
to be conducted by the State.”
15. May be, the candidates who had a chance of being
selected and appointed as Lecturers in the Government
Polytechnic Colleges on the basis of the results of the
written examination would be inconvenienced due to
another examination being conducted but a serious doubt
entertained by the Board about the magnitude of the
manipulation in the examination has to be given due
weightage.
16. Having considered the merits of the case we do not
approve the approach of the learned Single Judge of the
Principal Bench of the Madras High Court in taking a
different view with another Single Judge of the same Court.
It is trite law that the matter has to be referred to a larger
Bench in case of disagreement by a Coordinate Bench of
equal strength.
1317. In view of the aforementioned, we set aside the
judgment of the Division Bench of the Madras High Court.
The appeals are allowed.
…................................J.
[L. NAGESWARA RAO]
…….............................J.
[HEMANT GUPTA]
New Delhi,
August 08, 2019.
14