1
REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 703
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2363 OF 2023
arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 9710/2023 [@Diary No. 16317/2022]
SATHYAN …APPELLANT
Versus
STATE OF KERALA …RESPONDENT
J U D G M E N T
SANJAY KAROL J.,
1. This appeal is at the instance of the Accused-Appellant
namely, Sathyan against the order and judgement dated 5th
September, 2019 passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam
in Criminal Appeal No. 2822 of 20081, wherein his prayer to set
aside the conviction in S.C. No. 1140 of 2006 under Section 8 of
the Abkari Act, was denied and the findings returned by
1 Hereinafter referred to as the "impugned judgement"2
Additional District & Sessions Judge, Fast Track (Ad Hoc-11),
Kozhikode, in judgment dated 3rd November, 2008, were endorsed.
BRIEF FACTS
2. On 1stOctober 2003, the Appellant was arrested for carrying
five litres of Arrack, in a jerry can, in his autorickshaw. The case
was registered before the court of the Judicial Ist Class Magistrate,
Kunnamangalam taking on the number C.P.36/06. Subsequently,
the matter was committed, and eventually, made its way to the
Court of Additional District & Sessions Judge, Fast Track (Ad Hoc-
11), Kozhikode2.
3. Having framed 3 issues for consideration, the learned trial
Court examined the testimonies of PW–1 who was the Excise
Inspector Kunnamangalam range and the person who had
detected the offence; PW–2, the Assistant Excise Inspector who
was with PW-1 and that of PW–3, who was an independent witness
but turned hostile.
4. On the first issue of the possession and recovery of arrack
from the Appellant, and the second, concerning his guilt therefor,
the court returned findings in the affirmative on the basis of the
2 Hereinafter “trial court”3
testimonies of PW-1 namely Raveendandrananthan and PW-2,
namely, C.K Manoharan, while acknowledging that both of these
witnesses were official witnesses, and looking into decisions
rendered by this court on that aspect, stated that no reason could
be found to disbelieve their evidence or to believe that the articles
in question, referred to as “thondi articles” were tampered with.
5. On sentencing, which was issue No. 3, the Court stated that
it was a case not fit to be accorded the benefit of the Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958 and therefore the Appellant was sentenced to
one year of imprisonment and a fine of one lakh rupees and, in
default thereof, an additional period of 6 months rigorous
imprisonment.
THE IMPUGNED JUDGEMENT
6. The High Court has observed that the ground of unexplained
delay, on behalf of the Appellant, holds no merit as the Magistrate’s
endorsement indicates that the material was produced on the first
day and it was directed to be produced on the next working day.
7. The ground of delay in submitting the final report that is,
nearly 3 years from the date of detection, was negatived by the
court on the ground that the judgement relied on by the counsel4
for the Appellant3 has been declared per incurium by a subsequent
judgement.4 The effect thereof being that delay, ipso facto, is not
fatal to the case of the prosecution.
8. On the interpolation in the Mahazar, i.e., ext. P1 it was
observed that the same could not be given too much importance
as the crime and occurrence report registered on the same day
stated that the sample collected was indeed a sample of 180ml and
not 375 ml as was initially written on such exhibit. The chemical
examiners report also notes that the sample was received with its
seal intact and therefore no doubt could be seen from the point
that the sample drawn was from the contraband recovered from
the Appellant.
9. In view of the above findings, vide the impugned judgement,
the sentence handed down was confirmed.
10. Hence the present appeal.
ANALYSIS AND CONSIDERATION
11. Section 8 of the Abkari Act reads as follows-
“8. Prohibition of manufacture, import, export,
transport, transit, possession, storage, sales, etc., of
arrack. –
[(1) No person shall manufacture, import export [without
permit transit] possess, store, distribute, bottle or sell
arrack in any form.]
3 Krishnan H. v. State, [2015 (1) KHC 822]; 2014 SCC OnLine 28741
4 Santosh T.A. & Anr. v. State of Kerala [2017(5)KHC 107]5
[(2) If any person contravenes any provisions of sub-
section (1), he shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years and with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh.”]
12. The grounds of challenge, as urged by the Appellant are that-
in the absence of independent witnesses, the investigation cannot
be sustained since the detecting officer and investigator were both
official witnesses; there is interpolation in the Mahazar with
respect to the quantity of the sample initially being written as 375
ML but then subsequently been corrected to 180 ML; there is
unexplained delay in production of the contraband before the trial
court; the evidence of PW-2(C.K Manoharan) clearly shows that he
was not aware of the seizure and also that he was not present at
this spot; members of the patrol team were not made into
witnesses; independent witnesses who signed the Mahazar were
not examined, et cetera.
13. The question that we must consider is whether the
conviction, solely on the basis of official witnesses is sustainable
in the present facts? And, whether the delay of nearly 3 years in
filing the challan can be said to be materially affecting the
correctness of the judgement of the lower court as also the
judgement impugned before us?6
14. The trial court, when faced with this question of the
conviction being based solely on the testimony of official witnesses,
referred to two judgements of this court in Tahir v. State ( Delhi)5
and Karamjiti Singh v. State (Delhi Administration)6 to observe
that, there is no bar on convictions being based solely on the
testimony of the police officials.
15. The act governing the instant dispute was brought into force
to “consolidate and amend the law relating to the import, export,
transport, manufacture, sale and possession of intoxicating liquor
and of intoxicating drugs in the [state of Kerala]…” The Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 has been brought
on the statute books to “amend the law relating to narcotic drugs,
to make stringent provisions for the control and regulation of
operations relating to narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances…” Arguably, both these statutes seek the regulation of
similar products, with the purpose of controlling the flow of
identified substances. We find, in a case concerning the latter act,
a Constitution bench of this Court in Mukesh Singh v. State (NCT
of Delhi)7, having noted as follows:-
“10.1. Under Section 173 CrPC, the officer in charge of
a police station after completing the investigation is
5 (1996) 3 SCC 338
6 (2003) 5 SCC 291
7 (2020) 10 SCC 1207
required to file the final report/charge-sheet before the
Magistrate. Thus, under the scheme of CrPC, it cannot
be said that there is a bar to a police officer receiving
information for commission of a cognizable offence,
recording the same and then investigating it. On the
contrary, Sections 154, 156 and 157 permit the officer
in charge of a police station to reduce the information of
commission of a cognizable offence in writing and
thereafter to investigate the same…
xxx
12. Therefore, as such, there is no reason to doubt the
credibility of the informant and doubt the entire case of
the prosecution solely on the ground that the informant
has investigated the case. Solely on the basis of some
apprehension or the doubts, the entire prosecution
version cannot be discarded and the accused is not to
be straightaway acquitted unless and until the accused
is able to establish and prove the bias and the prejudice.
As held by this Court in Ram Chandra [State of
Rajasthan v. Ram Chandra, (2005) 5 SCC 151 : 2005
SCC (Cri) 1010] the question of prejudice or bias has to
be established and not inferred. The question of bias will
have to be decided on the facts of each case [see Vipin
Kumar Jain [Union of India v. Vipan Kumar Jain, (2005)
9 SCC 579] ].
xxx
12.2. Similarly, even with respect to offences under the
IPC, as observed hereinabove, there is no specific bar
against the informant/complainant investigating the
case. Only in a case where the accused has been able to
establish and prove the bias and/or unfair investigation
by the informant-cum-investigator and the case of the
prosecution is merely based upon the deposition of the
informant-cum-investigator, meaning thereby
prosecution does not rely upon other witnesses, more
particularly the independent witnesses, in that case,
where the complainant himself had conducted the
investigation, such aspect of the matter can certainly be
given due weightage while assessing the evidence on
record.
xxx
13.2. (II) In a case where the informant himself is the
investigator, by that itself cannot be said that the
investigation is vitiated on the ground of bias or the like
factor. The question of bias or prejudice would depend
upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
Therefore, merely because the informant is the
investigator, by that itself the investigation would not
suffer the vice of unfairness or bias and therefore on the8
sole ground that informant is the investigator, the
accused is not entitled to acquittal. The matter has to
be decided on a case-to-case basis. A contrary decision
of this Court in Mohan Lal v. State of Punjab [Mohan
Lal v. State of Punjab, (2018) 17 SCC 627 : (2019) 4 SCC
(Cri) 215] and any other decision taking a contrary view
that the informant cannot be the investigator and in
such a case the accused is entitled to acquittal are not
good law and they are specifically overruled.”
(emphasis supplied)
16. Therefore, it can no longer be said to be res integra that the
person receiving the information of the crime or detecting the
occurrence thereof, can investigate the same. Questioning such
investigation on the basis of bias or such like factor, would depend
on the facts and circumstances of each case. It is not amenable to
a general unqualified rule that lends itself to uniform application.
17. The submission made by the learned counsel for the
Appellant is that the fairness of the investigation was compromised
since the person who detected the crime and the person who
investigated, were one and the same. It was further submitted that
the official witnesses being unreliable, independent witnesses are
an indispensable requirement in the present case.
18. K.S Hegde J., writing for the court in the landmark A.K.
Kraipak v. Union of India8 observed as under:-
“It is difficult to prove the state of mind of a person.
Therefore what we have to see is whether there is
8 (1969) 2 SCC 2629
reasonable ground for believing that he was likely to
have been biased. We agree with the learned Attorney
General that a mere suspicion of bias is not sufficient.
There must be a reasonable likelihood of bias. In
deciding the question of bias we have to take into
consideration human probabilities and ordinary course
of human conduct. “
19. The concept of bias has been delved into by a two Judge
Bench of this Court in N.K. Bajpai v. Union of India9 as
follows:-
“48 Bias must be shown to be present. Probability of
bias, possibility of bias and reasonable suspicion that
bias might have affected the decision are terms of
different connotations. They broadly fall under two
categories i.e. suspicion of bias and likelihood of bias.
Likelihood of bias would be the possibility of bias and
bias which can be shown to be present, while suspicion
of bias would be the probability or reasonable suspicion
of bias. The former lead to vitiation of action, while the
latter could hardly be the foundation for further
examination of action with reference to the facts and
circumstances of a given case. The correct test would be
to examine whether there appears to be a real danger of
bias or whether there is only a probability or even a
preponderance of probability of such bias, in the
circumstances of a given case. If it falls in the prior
category, the decision would attract judicial
chastisement but if it falls in the latter, it would hardly
affect the decision, much less adversely.
20. In the present instance, nothing has been put forward to
show that there may be a reasonable ground for the presence of
bias or that there may be “a real danger of bias” and therefore the
9 (2012) 4 SCC 65310
bald plea of the investigation not been fair, judicious does not
support the case of the Appellant.
21. From the above discussion, it is clear that simply because the
person who detected the commission of the offence, is the one who
filed the report or investigated, such an investigation cannot be
said to be bad in law. That particular submission therefore must
necessarily be negatived. We also notice that, the judgement of the
trial court categorically records that the person conducting the
investigation was PW-4 and neither PW-1 nor PW-2, on whose
testimonies the court has relied to hand down a verdict of
conviction. On that ground also, the submission of the Appellant,
must be negatived.
22. Conviction being based solely on the evidence of police
officials is no longer an issue on which the jury is out. In other
words, the law is well settled that if the evidence of such a police
officer is found to be reliable, trustworthy then basing the
conviction thereupon, cannot be questioned, and the same shall
stand on firm ground. This Court in Pramod Kumar v. State
(Govt. of NCT of Delhi)10
13. This Court, after referring to State of U.P. v. Anil
Singh [1988 Supp SCC 686 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 48] , State
(Govt. of NCT of Delhi) v. Sunil [(2001) 1 SCC 652 : 2001
10 (2013) 6 SCC 58811
SCC (Cri) 248] and Ramjee Rai v. State of Bihar [(2006)
13 SCC 229 : (2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 626] has laid down
recently in Kashmiri Lal v. State of Haryana [(2013) 6
SCC 595 : 2013 AIR SCW 3102] that there is no absolute
command of law that the police officers cannot be cited
as witnesses and their testimony should always be
treated with suspicion. Ordinarily, the public at large
show their disinclination to come forward to become
witnesses. If the testimony of the police officer is found
to be reliable and trustworthy, the court can definitely
act upon the same. If, in the course of scrutinising the
evidence, the court finds the evidence of the police
officer as unreliable and untrustworthy, the court may
disbelieve him but it should not do so solely on the
presumption that a witness from the Department of
Police should be viewed with distrust. This is also based
on the principle that quality of the evidence weighs over
the quantity of evidence.
23. Referring to State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi) v. Sunil11, in
Kulwinder Singh v. State of Punjab12 this court held that: –
“23. … That apart, the case of the prosecution cannot
be rejected solely on the ground that independent
witnesses have not been examined when, on the perusal
of the evidence on record the Court finds that the case
put forth by the prosecution is trustworthy. When the
evidence of the official witnesses is trustworthy and
credible, there is no reason not to rest the conviction on
the basis of their evidence.”
24. We must note, that in the former it was observed:-
“21… At any rate, the court cannot start with the
presumption that the police records are untrustworthy.
As a proposition of law the presumption should be the
other way around. That official acts of the police have
been regularly performed is a wise principle of
presumption and recognised even by the legislature… If
the court has any good reason to suspect the
truthfulness of such records of the police the court
could certainly take into account the fact that no other
independent person was present at the time of recovery.
But it is not a legally approvable procedure to presume
11 (2001) 1 SCC 652
12 (2015) 6 SCC 67412
the police action as unreliable to start with, nor to
jettison such action merely for the reason that police did
not collect signatures of independent persons in the
documents made contemporaneous with such actions.”
25. Recently, this Court in Mohd. Naushad v. State (NCT of
Delhi13) had observed that the testimonies of police witnesses, as
well as pointing out memos do not stand vitiated due to the
absence of independent witnesses.
26. It is clear from the above propositions of law, as reproduced
and referred to, that the testimonies of official witnesses can nay
be discarded simply because independent witnesses were not
examined. The correctness or authenticity is only to be doubted
on “any good reason” which, quite apparently is missing from the
present case. No reason is forthcoming on behalf of the Appellant
to challenge the veracity of the testimonies of PW – 1 and PW – 2,
which the courts below have found absolutely to be inspiring in
confidence. Therefore, basing the conviction on the basis of
testimony of the police witnesses as undertaken by the trial court
and is confirmed by the High Court vide the impugned judgement,
cannot be faulted with.
27. Further submission made on behalf of the Appellant was,
“delay”, in two aspects; one, the contraband being produced
13 2023 SCC OnLine SC 78413
before the Magistrate and two, in the completion of investigation,
i.e., from the arrest of the Appellant on 1st October, 2003, to the
completion of the investigation on 17th April 2006. The first, is a
superficial ground, plainly negated by record. The trial court has
recorded in its order that the day after the arrest of the Appellant,
2nd October, 2003 was a holiday and therefore the contraband
seized was, upon directions produced before the concerned
Magistrate on the next working day, that being, 3 October 2003.
This being the uncontroverted position, the production of the
seized Arrack cannot be said to be delayed.
28. The second aspect of delay, however, assumes importance. It
has been time and again observed that a “fair trial”, is a right
flowing from Article 21 of the Constitution of India and it
encompasses all stages of trial including that of “investigation,
inquiry, trial, appeal, revision and the trial”14 In Dilawar v. State
of Haryana15 referring to various landmark judgements of this
court, a bench of 2 learned Judges, observed: –
“7. It is not necessary to refer to all the decisions of this
Court articulating the mandate of the Constitution that
there is implicit right under Article 21 for speedy trial
which in turn encompasses speedy investigation,
inquiry, appeal, revision and retrial. To determine
whether undue delay has occurred, one must have
regard to nature of offence, number of accused and
witnesses, workload of the court and the investigating
14 A.R Antulay v. R.S Nayak, (1992)1 SCC 225 (5-Judge bench)
15 (2018) 16 SCC 52114
agency, systemic delays. Inordinate delay may be taken
as presumptive proof of prejudice particularly when
accused is in custody so that prosecution does not
become persecution. Court has to balance and weigh
several relevant factors. Though it is neither advisable
nor feasible to prescribe any mandatory outer time-limit
and the court may only examine effect of delay in every
individual case on the anvil of Article 21 of the
Constitution,… This obligation flows from the law laid
down by this Court inter alia in Maneka Gandhi v. Union
of India [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC
248] , Hussainara Khatoon (I) v. State of Bihar
[Hussainara Khatoon (I) v. State of Bihar, (1980) 1 SCC
81 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 23] , Abdul Rehman Antulay v. R.S.
Nayak [Abdul Rehman Antulay v. R.S. Nayak, (1992) 1
SCC 225 : 1992 SCC (Cri) 93] and P. Ramachandra Rao
v. State of Karnataka [P. Ramachandra Rao v. State of
Karnataka, (2002) 4 SCC 578 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 830] .”
(Emphasis supplied)
29. A perusal of the record does not reflect any of the factors
enumerated above, to come to the aid of justifying the delay in
investigation of the instant offence, leading the final report to be
submitted after nearly 3 years. the contraband substance was
recovered immediately, only a few witnesses were examined, and
even if systemic delays on account of transfer of personnel is
considered, daytime elapsed between the date of the offence and
the submission of the final report cannot be justified.
30. However, mere urging that delay casts a suspicion on the
investigation, without any evidence being led in furtherance
thereof, cannot be sustained. Inordinate delay has been taken as
presumptive proof of prejudice, but in particular cases where the
accused is in custody. Record reveals that the accused was15
released on bail on 21st October 2003. Hence, the presumption of
prejudice will not apply in the instant facts.
31. Other grounds urged such as interpolation in the Mahazar,
are in the attending facts, not of such significance so as to vitiate
the entire case of the prosecution. Also, it has concurrently been
found by both the learned courts below that such interpolation i.e.,
quantity of the sample being initially noted as 375ML and
subsequently been corrected to 180 ML, with the latter indeed
being the correct quantity stands corroborated by the unharmed
sample, in sealed condition reaching the laboratory for chemical
analysis as also the report generated therefrom which notes the
sample to be corresponding to the latter, corrected quantity.
32. In view of the above discussion, we find that the Appellant’s
grounds to challenge the correctness of the judgement impugned,
fail.
33. However, considering the facts at hand, that the offence in
question is dated 1st October 2003; the final report after delayed
investigation was submitted on 17th April 2006, he was convicted
on 3rd November 2008, and that more than 20 years have passed
since the commission of the offence, this court finds it fit to modify
the sentence of the Appellant to serve a period of three months,16
simple imprisonment. The fine as awarded by the trial court and
as upheld by the High Court, is confirmed.
34. Considering the economic status, the period of time to deposit
the fine by the Appellant, as awarded, is extended by a period of
one year. The judgment of the trial court shall stand modified, also
to that extent.
35. The appeal is partly allowed in the terms indicated above.
36. The exemption from surrender as granted vide order dated
14th June 2022, stands vacated. The Appellant is directed to
surrender before the court concerned, forthwith.
37. Interlocutory applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
38. Costs easy.
--------------------------J.
(ABHAY S. OKA)
--------------------------J.
(SANJAY KAROL)
DATED : AUGUST 11, 2023;
PLACE : NEW DELHI.