REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2226 OF 2011
(Arising out of S.L.P. (Criminal) No. 5305 of 2008)
PUNJAB STATE WAREHOUSING — APPELLANT
CORPORATION FARIDKOT
VERSUS
M/S SH. DURGA JI TRADERS & ORS. — RESPONDENT
S
O R D E R
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal, by special leave, arises from judgment dated 18th
February, 2008 rendered by a learned Single Judge of the High Court
of Judicature for the States of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh. By
the impugned judgment, the learned Single Judge has dismissed the
petition preferred by the appellant under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short “the Code”), seeking quashing of
orders dated 18th February 2003, by which the Criminal Complaint
filed against the respondents in this appeal, for having committed
offences under Sections 406 and 409 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
(for short “IPC”) had been dismissed in default by the Chief Judicial
1Magistrate, Muktsar; and 9th November 2005 by which the application
for restoration of the said complaint was dismissed.
3. Succinctly put, the material facts giving rise to the present appeal are
as follows:
The appellant, a statutory body, constituted under the Warehousing
Corporation Act, 1962, filed a private criminal complaint under Sections
406 and 409 of the IPC against the respondents, alleging shortage of huge
quantity of rice in respect of paddy entrusted to them as miller.
Simultaneously, an application for exemption from personal appearance
of the complainant therein, was also filed, whereon the following order
was passed by the Trial Court on 16th April 1999.
“In view of the application made by the complainant
presence of complainant is exempted till further orders.”
The trial proceeded in the normal course for six years. However, on 18th
February 2003 the Chief Judicial Magistrate dismissed the case for non
appearance of the complainant even though the pleader for the appellant
was present in court. The order reads thus:
“None is present on behalf of the complainant nor any
request has been received on behalf of the complainant.
Both the accused are present on bail. In view of the
absence of the complainant, complaint stands dismissed
in default. Be consigned to Record Room.
Pronounced. Sd/-
Chief Judicial Magistrate
2Muktsar
At this stage an application for restoration of the
complaint has been filed on the ground that personal
appearance of the complainant was already exempted
vide order dated 16.4.99. Copy supplied to the counsel
for accused. However, let the notice to the accused
regarding the application be given present in the court for
24.3.03.
File be also produced on the date fixed.
Sd/-
CJM 18.2.03”
The application for restoration of the complaint was ultimately dismissed
on 9th November 2005, by the following order:
“After considering the arguments of the parties at length,
I am considered of the view that complaint was dismissed
in default. Complainant was already exempted from the
personal appearance on 16.4.99 and thereafter he
appeared in the court in person. The orders have become
redundant and the complainant had to seek afresh
exemption from appearance. From the perusal of the
record, it appears that complainant has never moved any
fresh application for exemption nor the same was ever
allowed and as such the order of dismissal dated 19.2.03
has become final and counsel for the accused has referred
the Apex Court judgments and I have gone through the
same and find a force in the contention of the learned
counsel for accused. There is no provision in Criminal
Procedure Code to review the order and recall the
summons. Hence, application moved by the applicant is
hereby declined and accused are also discharged. File be
consigned to the record room.”
4. Aggrieved thereby the appellant moved the High Court with a petition
under Section 482 of the Code for setting aside of the said orders and
restoration of the complaint. As aforesaid, by the impugned judgment,
3the High Court has dismissed the petition, holding that the dismissal in
default of a private complaint amounts to acquittal of the accused, and
since against such an order a specific statutory remedy exists in the
Code, a petition under Section 482 of the Code cannot be entertained.
Hence the present appeal by the complainant.
5. As per the office report, the respondents had refused to accept
summons when the same were tendered to them by the process server.
Consequently, vide order dated 18th September, 2009 the respondents
were deemed to have been served. We have heard the learned counsel
for the appellant.
6. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant has assailed the impugned
judgment mainly on the ground that the discretion vested in the High
Court under Section 482 of the Code being very wide, in the instant
case the High Court grossly erred in declining to exercise its
jurisdiction on the ground that an alternative remedy was available to
the appellant against an order of acquittal of the accused. Relying on
the decision of this Court in Aseem Shabanli Merchant Vs. Brij
Mehra & Anr.1, learned counsel has urged that having regard to the
serious nature of the charges against the respondents, the complaint
should not have been dismissed in default on account of non
appearance of the complainant, who had been otherwise exempted
1 (2005) 11 SCC 412
4from personal appearance, and the case ought to have been tried on
merits. In support of his contention that dismissal of the complaint
because of a singular default in appearance on the part of the
complainant, was improper, learned counsel relied upon the decision
of this Court in Mohd. Azeem Vs. A. Venkatesh & Anr.2. It is also
argued that having regard to the nature of the case, the High Court
committed a patent error in dismissing the petition under Section 482
of the Code on the ground of availability of an alternative remedy. In
support of the proposition that availability of an alternative remedy
per se is no ground for dismissal of an application under Section 482
of the Code, learned counsel commends us to the decision of this
Court in Dhariwal Tobacco Products Ltd & Ors.. Vs. State of
Maharashtra & Anr.3.
7. The short question that falls for consideration is whether in the fact-
situation the High Court was justified in declining to exercise its
jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code?
8. It is trite law that the inherent power of the High Court ought to be
exercised to prevent miscarriage of justice or to prevent the abuse of
the process of the Court or to otherwise secure the ends of justice. The
Court possesses wide discretionary powers under the Section to secure
these ends. In this behalf it would be profitable to refer to the decision
2 (2002) 7 SCC 726
3 (2009) 2 SCC 370
5of this Court in Jeffrey J. Diermeier & Anr. Vs. State of West Bengal
& Anr.4, wherein one of us (D.K.Jain, J.), speaking for the bench,
explained the scope and ambit of inherent powers of the High Court
under Section 482 of the Code as follows:
“20…………..…………………………………………...
The Section itself envisages three circumstances under
which the inherent jurisdiction may be exercised, namely,
(i) to give effect to an order under the Code; (ii) to
prevent abuse of the process of Court; and (iii) to
otherwise secure the ends of justice. Nevertheless, it is
neither possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible
rule which would govern the exercise of inherent
jurisdiction of the Court. Undoubtedly, the power
possessed by the High Court under the said provision is
very wide but it is not unlimited. It has to be exercised
sparingly, carefully and cautiously, ex debito justitiae to
do real and substantial justice for which alone the court
exists. It needs little emphasis that the inherent
jurisdiction does not confer an arbitrary power on the
High Court to act according to whim or caprice. The
power exists to prevent abuse of authority and not to
produce injustice.
……………………………………………………………
22. In Dinesh Dutt Joshi v. State of Rajasthan [(2001)
8 SCC 570], while dealing with the inherent powers of
the High Court, this Court has observed thus (SCC p.
573, para 6):
“6. ...The principle embodied in the section
is based upon the maxim: quando lex
aliquid alicui concedit, concedere videtur et
id sine quo res ipsae esse non potest i.e.
when the law gives anything to anyone, it
gives also all those things without which the
thing itself would be unavailable. The
section does not confer any new power, but
only declares that the High Court possesses
inherent powers for the purposes specified in
4 (2010) 6 SCC 243
6the section. As lacunae are sometimes found
in procedural law, the section has been
embodied to cover such lacunae wherever
they are discovered. The use of
extraordinary powers conferred upon the
High Court under this section are however
required to be reserved, as far as possible,
for extraordinary cases.”
9. Bearing in mind the afore-stated legal position in regard to the scope
and width of the power of the High Court under Section 482 of the
Code, we are of the opinion that the impugned decision is clearly
indefensible. As noted above, the High Court has rejected the petition
under Section 482 of the Code on the ground of availability of an
alternative remedy without considering the seriousness of the nature of
the offences and the fact that the Trial Court had dismissed the
complaint on a hyper technical ground viz. since the complainant had
been appearing in person, despite order dated 16th April 1999,
exempting him from personal appearance, the said exemption order
became redundant and the complainant should have sought a fresh
exemption from personal appearance. We feel that such a view defies
any logic. An order of exemption from personal appearance continues
to be in force till it is revoked or recalled. We are convinced that in the
instant case, rejection of appellant’s petition under Section 482 of the
Code has resulted in miscarriage of justice. Availability of an
alternative remedy of filing an appeal is not an absolute bar in
7entertaining a petition under Section 482 of the Code. As aforesaid,
one of the circumstances envisaged in the said Section, for exercise of
jurisdiction by the High Court is to secure the ends of justice.
Undoubtedly, the Trial Court had dismissed the complaint on a
technical ground and therefore, interests of justice required the High
Court to exercise its jurisdiction to set aside such an order so that the
Trial Court could proceed with the trial on merits.
10.Resultantly, the appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment as also the
orders of the Chief Judicial Magistrate dated 18th February 2003 and
9th November 2005 are set aside and the complaint filed by the
appellant is restored to the file of the Chief Judicial Magistrate. The
Chief Judicial Magistrate shall now proceed with the trial after
securing the presence of the accused.
.........…..………………………………
(D.K. JAIN, J.)
..……………………………..…………
(ANIL R. DAVE, J.)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 28, 2011.
8